2023 Spring CH223 Organic Chemistry II. Topic list for the POST exam-3 materials. (The
final exam questions will come/derive from POST exam3 materials + three mid-term
exams + practice problems).
The concepts, reaction conditions (e.g. reagents), reaction product structure, and arrow-pushing
reaction mechanisms of the following topics should be mastered for the exam (unless otherwise
noted). See the exam practice problem to see how those will be asked in the exam.
The topics of the previous exams will not be the main focus of this exam, but some
concepts/terms/reactions of the previous topics may be involved for this exam (e.g. benzene is
the 6-member ring aromatic compound which was learned in the exam1 topics).
A topic highlighted in cyan is about reaction mechanisms. The cyan highlight does NOT indicate
that it is more important than other topics.

Class33 amine intro (Loudon 23, Carey 22)
Amines are basic and nucleophilic.
Alkylation of amines with alkyl halide (e.g. methyl iodide).
Mechanism of alkylation of amines with alkyl halide (SN2 reactions)
Other alkylation methods with epoxide (three member ring with oxygen) and alpha,betaunsaturated carbonyl/nitrile.

Class34 reductive amination (Loudon 23, Carey 22)
Reductive amination (also called reductive alkylation) by amine and aldehyde/ketone with
hydride.
Mechanism of the reductive amination (Schiff base/imine formation first, and then hydride
reduction of the imine).
Hofmann elimination occurs with a quaternary ammonium salt with hydroxide ion to provide
alkene.
Mechanism of Hofmann elimination.
Amines react with sodium nitrite, NaNO2 (not nitrate which is NaNO3) to produce diazonium
salt. (the formation of the diazonium is called diazotization)
Mechanism of the formation of the diazonium salt.
Alkyl (also called aliphatic) diazonium salts releases N2 gas and generate carbocation that
produces SN1 or E1 product (i.e. alcohol or alkene)
Aryl diazonium can be replaced with halide such as chloride and bromide using copper halide
(Sandmeyer reaction).

Reactions of aryl diazonium with cyano, iodide, H2O/Cu2O (hydrolysis), H2PO2 (replacement
with hydrogen) will NOT be asked in the final exam.

Class35 azo compounds (Loudon 23, Carey 22)
Reaction of diazonium with (activated) benzene derivatives produces azo compounds.
Mechanism for azo compound formation.
Gabriel synthesis to make primary amine with phthalimide from alkyl halide without secondary
and tertiary amine side products
Staudinger reaction to make primary amine with sodium azide (NaN3) followed by phosphine
(PPh3) from alkyl halide without secondary and tertiary amine side products.
Reduction of nitro group with Sn/HCl or Fe/HCl produces primary amine groups

Class36 Pd amination (Loudon 23, Carey 22)
Buchwald-Hartwig amination is another Pd cross coupling of ayrl halide but with amines (instead
of boronic acid in Suzuki coupling or alkene in Heck coupling).

