Jose Barbeito
Futuristic Analysis
4/5/25

An Artifact Analysis on the Stillsuits and Deathstills Used by the
Fremen on Arrakis in Dune 2
​

My chosen film for this artifact analysis is Dune 2. To date it is my favorite movie for the

perfect mix of stunning visuals, powerful music, and gripping plot. The details of the
sequel—lent to it by the books—give it a sense of infinite complexity, similar to what you see in
the real world. One of the technological artifacts that stood out to me more than any of the
others was the use of the Fremen’s stillsuits and deathstills. Before we dive into the details of
the artifact, the environment of Arrakis and the Fremen people have to be understood. Arrakis,
the primary setting for both movies, is a desert planet, a land where water is scarce and sand
dunes provide the backdrop for many of my favorite scenes and plotlines. Because of this lack
of water, it would go to reason that the living people on Arrakis—the Fremen—would consider
water to be highly important. In fact, the Fremen have an immense respect for water; they
admonish crying and vomiting, they take care not to waste a single drop when possible, and
even go so far to attach the “soul” of a person to their water. The consequences of this are
twofold: it creates a society affixed to the reverence of water and pushes much of the
technology they create to the creation, preservation, and reclamation of water. In this essay, I
want to talk about one such technology: the stillsuit, and its offshoot the deathstill.
​

The stillsuit is a whole body suit, equipped with watertight fabric, a mask and nasal

cannula for water reclamation from the breath, and a liquid storage and extraction from bodily
excretions. It is usually shown in the film as a dark suit, looking to be made of rubber and cloth,
with boots and gloves to match. It seems to be made over a brown cloth and is usually worn
with a long cloth cowl, giving the appearance of a dark patchy ruffled spot. This design was
acutely made to blend in with the surroundings of Arrakis, a primarily brown planet due to the

rocks and sand. The biggest use of the stillsuits are for traversing the sand dunes over the
planet. With use of the stillsuits, almost all of the water lost by a person, whether it be sweat,
breathing, or urination can be reclaimed, allowing the wearer to survive weeks in the harsh
conditions.
​

The other side of the stillsuits is the deathstill, an offshoot of the technology and is used

to reclaim water from the bodies of the dead. Since humans are upwards of 70% water, a dead
body is a valuable asset. Water can be reclaimed either in the field by using a filtered suction
device (usually saved for enemies and creatures) or within a sietch. When a Fremen dies, they
are sealed with wax and essentially vacuum sealed, allowing the machine to extract as much
water from the person as possible. The use of this water is important and will be covered later.
Both of these technologies are offshoots of the same technology - water reclamation from the
body, and how that enables the creation of a society based around this resource.
​

The interesting thing about stillsuits is that every member of the Fremen receives one

when they are required to leave the safety of the sietches. There is no noticeable difference
between man or woman, leader or follower, and the user does very little to “use” the suit, it
operates the same for whoever is wearing it. The primary method of using the suit is by drinking
the reclaimed water through a small tube in the mouthpiece, something which anyone can do
and everyone has access to. In regards to the flipside of the equipment—the deathstill—its
primary purpose is to extract water from the dead. In the case of enemies, such as the
Harkonnen, the water can be considered “tainted”, only useful for cooling systems and other
technical uses. When the water comes from a member of the Fremen, the water is carried with
great reverence in a holy ceremony to a great pool of water, stored deep within the sietch. It is
there that it is added to the pool, which contains the water of hundreds of thousands of other
Fremen. This provides a strong foundation for the socio/cultural meanings associated with the
deathstill and the water reclamation, which will be discussed later. The primary way these
deathstills are interfaced is by a series of control mechanisms barely shown in the movie, only

that a team of skilled Fremen are tasked with preparing the body for water extraction. The
largest constraint to both of these artifacts is the necessity for the supporting infrastructure. The
stillsuits need to be fabricated and maintained, including teaching new Fremen how to wear it,
something Paul (the main character) seems to have an intuitive understanding of, which
surprises many Fremen in the first movie. The deathstills are specifically incorporated into the
sietch infrastructure, unable to be easily moved and only able to be used by skilled technicians.
They both provide the Fremen with a valuable ability—retaining and reclaiming water.
​

It is clear from the movie and the books that this technology is a crucial part in how the

Fremen live on Arrakis. In the books, the technology housed within the stillsuits and the
deathstills are fabricated in sietches by skilled craftsmen. Almost nothing is shown in Dune 2
about the production, repair, or disposal of the stillsuits and deathstills. There is also no
explanation of the organizational control about the artifacts—it is explained that each sietch has
a leader, called a Naib. In Dune 2, Stilgar is the Naib in Paul’s sietch. It could be argued that the
Naib is in charge of ensuring their people have access to the suits, but it is not shown in the
movie.
​

Finally, the most important part of the stillsuits and the deathstill is the cultural and social

implications of the technology. The Fremen put an immense amount of religious significance on
a member’s water. “Water is sacred,” a quote told by many throughout the movie, namely
Stilgar. There is a pivotal scene in the movie where Stilgar is explaining the rituals to Paul’s
mother, Lady Jessica, while the Fremen pour Jamis’ water into the vast quantity of water held
underground in the sietch. Stilgar explained that even if they were dying of thirst, no Fremen
would ever take so much as a sip of the water, because it contains the souls of all the Fremen
before them, and that they are saving the water for when the planet needs to be restored to a
lush ecosystem. Upon realizing the hundreds of thousands of lives required to fill the pool of
water, Lady Jessica begins to shed a tear, only for it to be caught by Stilgar, who wipes it with
his thumb and drinks it, telling her “Never give your water away, not even for the dead.”

​

This line alone, within the scene about the reverence the Fremen have for the water of

the dead, provides a unique and deep insight of how the Fremen exist around this resource.
This proved some ethical context around their actions, such as only using the water of enemies
for cooling systems, i.e. not allowing them to pass into the “afterlife” of the Fremen. In some
cases (primarily in the books and in the unique case of Baron Vladimir Harkonnen), the highest
dishonor one can do is leave someone’s body for the desert creatures, water unextracted. It
provides the framework to understand the religious and cultural messages the Fremen have
within their sietches. I would love to dive into this topic and explain how the “water of life” is a
crucial part of their religion (in addition to the social structure around spitting to greet someone),
but that is slightly outside the scope of this essay, which is focusing primarily on the stillsuits and
deathstills, both of which are the primary ways the Fremen obtain and hold on to water.
Finally, the stillsuits and deathstills provide a unique view into the hyper efficiency of the
Fremen culture. Throughout the entire movie, the consistent theme around saving water is
being as efficient as possible, whether it be the creation, gathering, or reclaiming of water
through various means. This efficiency seeps into the entire Fremen culture, and it is clear that
no one is above saving water—be it reverend mothers, Fremen warriors, or children of the
sietches. Throughout this essay, a multitude of examples have been given about how the
Fremen interact with water, but the stillsuits and deathstills provide a unique perspective to their
water-focused efficiencies.
In conclusion, stillsuits and deathstills are a unique technological innovation made by the
Fremen initially to combat the harsh realities of living on a desert planet like Arrakis. These
complex technologies evolved over time to create social and cultural meanings past their
material nature, and have become an integral part of every Fremen life, being worn every day
and being the machine that is used at the end of their life to ferry them into the afterlife. While a
further analysis on the role of water within the Fremen culture could be done, I believe that
stillsuits and deathstills are a key part of this water-scarce social ecosystem.

