To whom it may concern,
I am writing this letter to express my enthusiastic recommendation of Jose Barbeito to
your Materials Science master’s program. I have had the privilege of being Jose’s manager
during his part time employment at Wolfspeed. This year Jose has been a part of my Metrology
Process Engineering team working in a fast paced, ever-changing, 24/7 manufacturing
environment, and has been the perfect addition to my team of six engineers. He had done a co-op
at Wolfspeed the previous year and I was lucky to get to know him when he came back for a
second time and started work in our department. We had a few co-op employees this year, but
none so impactful as Jose. In fact, I fought to get special permission to extend his part time
employment with Wolfspeed since he has been so essential in helping our team meet our goals.
Ultimately, our entire team of upper leadership agreed that keeping him on the payroll until his
graduation was an absolute necessity - an exception not made for any other co-ops this year.
There are many qualities that make Jose stand out. Being a full time engineering student
and coming to work is already commendable, and one has never heard him complain. He takes
his job duties seriously and continues to excel in school. Just these very base items set the tone
and let me understand his incredible drive and work ethic. I could tell from our first face to face
meeting that Jose was incredibly bright and trustworthy. Since then I have given him many
important tasks and projects. Noteabley, Jose has completed several equipment qualifications,
calibrations, and gauge studies all in record time. He is able to accomplish so much inside of
limited 20 hour work weeks that would take more seasoned engineers much longer. I believe this
is due to his positive attitude and unrivaled tenacity, with a little help from a good manager.
Jose is really an intelligent individual who takes direction well, but also offers his own
creative problem solving to tackle difficult challenges. Outside of the direct projects and tasks I
have given him, he has also, of his own accord, developed scripts and organizational policies that
have helped streamline data analysis and subsequent qualifications. He is constantly thinking of
ways to make the lives of his co workers better both through technical expertise and warm
gestures. Integrating him into my team was seamless, as he became fast friends with those
around him. He has shown an impressive aptitude for any challenge thrown at him, but does the
job with an air of grace and gratitude.
A true renaissance man, Jose continues to surprise and delight the scientist in me. His
interests in astronomy and novel writing lend themselves to showcasing how multifaceted he can

be, finding joy in many interesting things this world has to offer, while still remaining driven and
focussed as needed. I cannot say enough good things about Jose. In a world where many would
prefer to google their way to a degree, any graduate program would be lucky to have such a
bright young student in their cohort, one who truly has that unbridled passion for learning.
Sincerely, a grieving manager set to lose her star employee to bigger and better things,
Ava Pasnon

