Jose Barbeito
9/3/24
The Rise and Fall of American Imperialism
Genghis Khan, Joan of Arc, Attila the Hun, Cleopatra, Julis Caesar - history is filled with
men and women who have permanently stamped their mark on this earth through the act of
conquering lands far and wide. Today, we look back on them with awe, reverence, and respect.
We create movies, write books, and sing songs with their stories as inspirations; their are actions
woven through the tales we tell ourselves and praised as the pinnacle of human achievement. In
the years that followed the creation of the United States of America, this sentiment burned
strong. While Liberty, Equality, Power: Since 1863 portrays American expansion during the turn
of the 20th century as the indelible actions of a population burdened with glorious purpose, this
portrayal contrasts directly with the view expressed in “Fantastic Imperialism” and in modern
society, which is one of blatant American pretentiousness and indifferent domination.
In Liberty, Equality, Power: Since 1863, two sections unveil the tone of the book’s
attitude toward America's colonialism. First is the description and explanation of the fairs,
specifically the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition of 1876 and the Chicago World Fair of 1893.
The Philadelphia Centennial Exposition of 1876 was deemed a “defining moment for the middle
class.” 1 The fair was comprised of 30,000 exhibits on 300 acres of land, with an extravagant
array of buildings and displays. Exhibits included the telephone, the typewriter, and the world's
largest generator, all American inventions that placed the country and its inventors at the
forefront of human innovation. As stated in the book, “Visitors were awed by recent industrial,
agricultural, and cultural innovations, including elevators, monorails, streetcars, linoleum floor
coverings, canned food, and dry yeast. Many Americans also had their first taste of bananas and
hot popcorn at the fair.” 2 Over ten million people attended the fair at Philadelphia, which
showed the world, including countries like the UK and Japan, that the US was a powerful
industrial power. This sentiment was carried until the Chicago World Fair of 1893, where it was
multiplied tenfold.
1.
2.
3.

John Murrin, Pekka Hämäläinen, Paul Johnson, et al, Liberty, Equality, Power: A History of the American
People, Volume 2: Since 1863 (Boston: Cengage, 2019), 484
5 Murrin, Liberty, Equality, Power, 484
“Fabulous Imperialism! The 1893 Columbian Exposition,” The Pinky Show, Associated Animals, Inc., 2019
(accessed Sept. 3, 2024), http://www.pinkyshow.org/projectarchives/videos/fabulous-imperialism-the-1893columbian-exposition

The Chicago World Fair of 1893 was, as described by the book, a turning point in
American history. Over 30 million people attended the fair, just under half of the country's 63
million. Over $29 million dollars ($980 million today) were spent constructing its 400 buildings
over 700 acres. Brilliant buildings painted in white were designed to focus on the grandeur of the
new American society, which had just finished its western expansion and now spanned coast to
coast. The “White City,” as it came to be known, was a physical representation of the idealized
future for the American people. Visitors viewed new inventions such as electrified houses with
washing machines, lighting fixtures, and electric stoves in a time where most people had never
used electricity before in their lives. New electric dynamos produced even more electricity than
the engines in the Philadelphia Fair, showcasing the unstoppable power of American innovation.
Secondary to the White City stood the Midway Plaisance, a strip of buildings filled with displays
from other countries and far away lands. Filled with exotic animals, ethnological displays, and
exhibits where visitors could view abducted foreigners, trapped in crude arrangements of their
native culture built for the pleasure of viewers. For some, the Midway Plaisance was a crude
human zoo, but for others it was a way to experience the thrilling and exciting adventures of
lands unseen while staying in the relative safety of their home. The book emphasizes the novelty
of these exhibits, but does not comment much on its effect on the American population. Instead,
it sets the stage for the colonialist fever that sets in, explained in Chapter 22.
While brief, the section in Liberty, Equality, Power: Since 1863 that explores the actions
of the American people after the Chicago World fair says more in what it doesn't say than in
what it does. At the turn of the century, filled with the frenzy of American superiority instilled by
the previous fairs and empowered through innovations due to the industrial revolution, America
turned to land beyond its borders for conquest. In just five years, from 1898 to 1903, America
polished its grip on Hawaii, Guam, Puerto Rico, the Philippines, Cuba, and Alaska. Men such as
President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Admiral Alfred Thayer Mahan led the charge to quench the
thirst for land, fashioning the nation into a political and economic superpower, armed with a
first-class navy strong enough to make America’s presence felt around the world. Overall, the
book Liberty, Equality, Power: Since 1863 gives a rosy outlook to the US expansion in the late
19th and early 20th century, giving credence to the men and women who bravely pioneered into
1.
2.
3.

John Murrin, Pekka Hämäläinen, Paul Johnson, et al, Liberty, Equality, Power: A History of the American
People, Volume 2: Since 1863 (Boston: Cengage, 2019), 484
5 Murrin, Liberty, Equality, Power, 484
“Fabulous Imperialism! The 1893 Columbian Exposition,” The Pinky Show, Associated Animals, Inc., 2019
(accessed Sept. 3, 2024), http://www.pinkyshow.org/projectarchives/videos/fabulous-imperialism-the-1893columbian-exposition

the unknown, spreading America's borders from coast to coast and beyond, filling the space
between with novel displays and genius inventions. The book makes it clear that most Amercans
thought extraordinarily highly of themselves and of their country during the start of the 20th
century. This sentiment is echoed in the video “Fabulous Imperialism,” which goes on to explain
the subtle message the people of America received in both fairs.
The only thing fabulous about the video “Fabulous Imperialism” is the precision in its
analysis of the effect the Chicago World Fair had on its visitors. It briefly talks about the
inspiring vistas of the White City before delving into the powerful effect the Midway Plaisance
had on visitors. Counter to the book, “Fabulous Imperialism” argues that the displays at the
Midway Plaisance was a way to frame the new United States of America in a glowing light by
comparing it to the strange and appalling cultures beyond American shores. The video makes it
clear that exhibits were made to compare and contrast the height of American values against
peoples such as Africans, Pacific Islanders, Arabs, and Indians. The Midway Plaisance was filled
with drinking, fighting, and exotic dancers. It was adorned with different religions and different
people, positioned in a way to make the Christian, white, and newly technological path of life
appear as appealing as possible while simultaneously ostracizing these foreign cultures,
religions, and people. The subtle message with the Midway Plaisance was easy to miss, yet
profoundly powerful. It sent a message of American superiority to the rest of the world, a sense
of “us vs them,” a message to all people that America was becoming the new superpower in the
world - a superpower that subdued all other cultures and people under the guise of economic and
industrial growth. “Fabulous Imperialism” says it best, saying the foreign people in the exhibits
“must have appeared very very inferior, and perhaps even... very appropriate subjects for
civilizing and spiritual rehabilitation, American-style.” 3
Both of these sources would have us believe that events such as the Chicago World Fair,
the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition, and the rapid extension of America's reach through
control of far away islands are crucial to understanding American culture. A reader of both could
argue that the message of both sources is that the theme of American Imperialism is as core to
our country’s identity as drinking beer and grilling hot dogs while waving an American flag over
our field of corn. Instead, I believe that while America’s past was forged by people with this
1.
2.
3.

John Murrin, Pekka Hämäläinen, Paul Johnson, et al, Liberty, Equality, Power: A History of the American
People, Volume 2: Since 1863 (Boston: Cengage, 2019), 484
5 Murrin, Liberty, Equality, Power, 484
“Fabulous Imperialism! The 1893 Columbian Exposition,” The Pinky Show, Associated Animals, Inc., 2019
(accessed Sept. 3, 2024), http://www.pinkyshow.org/projectarchives/videos/fabulous-imperialism-the-1893columbian-exposition

mentality, the citizens of this nation today could care less about conquering other lands. This, I
believe, is the main driving factor in the difference between the message from the book and the
video. The book is written by people examining the historical actions and context of the
expansion of the US in the early twentieth century, while the video is the analysis of a modern
person walking the physical grounds in modern times. Today, almost all references to the
Chicago World Fair have been erased, the large lawns replaced with quiet parks and dirty signs,
the grand lakes filled with modern boats, the statues replaced with smaller replicas. It is clear that
the mentality shared by many Americans at the turn of the century in regards to the expansion of
America’s borders has died. People today want to keep immigrants out, much less conquer
foreign lands. Political figures fight against long wars in other countries, instead opting to focus
on domestic problems. Corporations and industrial powerhouses seek only the next consumer,
regardless of their location, and buyers care only about how fast their cardboard box will appear
at their doorstep. Gone are the days of American Imperialism, as shown by the way we treat the
history surrounding these events. Today, the only instance in which an average American is
thinking deeply about foreign countries is in the structure of planning a vacation. For example, I
can guarantee that most Americans have not heard of the Chicago World Fair, despite knowing
about significant events from that time, such as the first flight in Kitty Hawk or the famous
Brown vs Board of Education. For an event that was a “defining moment for the middle class,” 1
it seems as though its effect has all but disappeared in the American populace.
In conclusion, Liberty, Equality, Power: Since 1863 and “Fabulous Imperialism” give two
accounts of the Chicago world fair and give a snapshot of the mentality embraced by the
American middle class. While the book embroiders a silvery outline to the imperialist culture
held by many Americans, the video emphasizes the undertones of cultural superiority infused
into American culture by these fairs. In analyzing the similarities and differences, I found myself
of the position that both pieces of media overplay the significance of these events, as the colonial
energy that once invigorated Americans has long since died, replaced with an indifference to
foreign politics and a society focused on matters only within its borders.

1.
2.
3.

John Murrin, Pekka Hämäläinen, Paul Johnson, et al, Liberty, Equality, Power: A History of the American
People, Volume 2: Since 1863 (Boston: Cengage, 2019), 484
5 Murrin, Liberty, Equality, Power, 484
“Fabulous Imperialism! The 1893 Columbian Exposition,” The Pinky Show, Associated Animals, Inc., 2019
(accessed Sept. 3, 2024), http://www.pinkyshow.org/projectarchives/videos/fabulous-imperialism-the-1893columbian-exposition

