This black and white cartoon shows a dying woman, raising her hand as a final action, laying on
the ground, a bloody Rwanda inscribed into her side. A group of onlookers wave back at her in
a benign curiosity, wondering what is going on. This is a condemnation of the international
communities reaction to the Rwandan Genocide of 1994. About a million Tutsis and Hutus were
massacred over 100 days, a magnitude of loss unimaginable to many people. This cartoon
reflects the lack of response and intervention by countries that had been watching and listening
to the situation on the ground. In the cartoon, other countries look at the dying Rwanda from
afar, trying to be polite and cordial, saying things like “She seems to be waving”, and “We should
wave back, I suppose". Instead of waving hello, Rwanda is waving goodbye, as her people are
slaughtered without mercy.

This cartoon, titled “Next!” comes from the Industrialization Era in the early 1900’s. It shows a
large octopus, with a copper cap with tentacles wrapped around various caricatures. The
octopus, representing standard oil, had its tentacles wrapped around numerous sources of
power, such as the Capital, the Treasury, copper, steel, and shipping industries, even reaching
out towards the White House. It specifically called out the rampant power that large
corporations, specifically standard oil, maintained. This seems to symbolize that America is
coming to terms with being under the whims of these massive corporations, bending to their will
and doing their bidding. It gives an atmosphere of dread, showing the inescapable control of
these corporations, usually run by robber barons.

This cartoon, titled “The New Member of the Orchestra”, shows a group of men in an orchestra,
all carrying various musical instruments, staring down at their new member, a man dressed in
American clothing and holding a tophat. Here, the orchestra is referring to the “Concert of
Europe”, and the newcomer is Uncle Sam. He carries a sheet of paper, referring to the Monroe
Doctrine and demonstrating American influence. Some of the European countries have a sour
look on their face, while others a more curious tone. This is a representation of the sentiment
faced by the United States upon their entering into the world stage. Some countries were not
happy to see them, while others watched carefully to see America’s next move.

This cartoon shows a proud Ronald Reagan leading a tired Mikhail Gorbachev. This cartoon
came out after the collapse of the Berlin Wall, which had much to do with Gorbachev’s actions
leading the Soviet Union in 1989 Through his policies like glasnost (openness) and perestroika
(restructuring), events gave way to the collapse of the Soviet Union and, ultimately, the Berlin
Wall. While Ronald Reagan took most of the credit in the eyes of the American people, it was
Gorbachev who was the primary instigator for this, and much credit should go to him. The US’s
indifference to Gorbachev is well explained by Ronald Regan’s attitude, calling the man by
saying “what’s his name”, instead of by his real name, and ordering him, not asking him or
working with him, to “tear down this wall!”

This cartoon, titled “Ho Hum! No chance of contagion” and drawn by Dr. Seuss, is a satirical
cartoon in the late 1930s that made fun of the politicians who argued for isolationism from
Europe’s ongoing battle with the Nazis. It shows Uncle Sam sleeping in his own bed while
European Countries sleep beside him, riddled with issues stemming from the war and
communism. It was during this time that Congress was determined to keep the US out of war
through the Neutrality Laws, but it was clear to many in the american poiulus that this was a
vain effort, sooner or later the US would have to deal with the issues going on in Europe
because if they did not, those issues would come to them. And come to them they did. This
cartoon accurately summarises the “head in the sand” mentality that the US government
stressed during this time, a reluctance that did not stand for long as the war raged out of Europe
and into the rest of the world.

