1
Theorizing technology and
its role in crime and
law enforcement
Philip Brey

1. Introduction
Virtually any human practice or institution that exists in society has been seriously affected
by the use of technology. However, the role of technology in society is little understood.
Decision-making processes concerning technology are often driven by false and naïve images
of technology and its interaction with society. A sound understanding of technology and its role
in human practices and institutions requires specialist knowledge. Such knowledge is developed
in several fields in the social sciences and humanities, including science and technology studies
(STS), philosophy of technology, ergonomics, management of technology, and others. In this
chapter, I will review these fields, with particular reference to approaches and theories in STS
and the philosophy of technology, and I will report on their main findings regarding the role of
technology in society. This review will be carried out in Section 2.
A second aim of this chapter is to introduce a particular theory of technology and to apply it
to an analysis of the role of technology in crime and law enforcement. The theory in question,
extension theory, provides a powerful perspective for understanding the role of technology in
society, in particular the powers that technological artifacts give to their users (individuals,
groups and organizations) and how these powers help them further their aims. After introducing
extension theory in Section 3, I will use it in an analysis of the use of technology in crime
and law enforcement in Section 4. This analysis intends to show how new technologies have
extended the powers of both criminals and law enforcement, and how these new powers play
out against each other. The chapter ends with a concluding section that reviews the chapter’s
main findings.

2. Understanding technology
Technology is a key driver of social change. The industrial revolution and the technologies it
has yielded have radically transformed a great number of societies. Modern societies are shaped
by modern technology, which has caused revolutionary changes in work, the economy, social
organization and the way of life. The ever increasing pace of technological innovation promises
more such changes for the future. Because of the profoundly influential role of technology in
17

Philip Brey

every sector and institution of society, whether it is healthcare, education, government, law,
business, the arts, or any other, an adequate understanding of these sectors nowadays requires
an understanding of the role and impact on them of technology.
Several academic fields have emerged to study technology and its role in society, including
the nature of technology, its design, development, and historical evolution, its dependence on
social and economic developments, its impact on individuals, society, and the environment,
and the governance of technology. Most centrally, technology is studied in the interdisciplinary
field of science and technology studies (STS), sometimes also called science, technology and
innovation studies (STIS) (Hackett et al. 2007; Sismondo 2009). This field aims to study the
evolution of the institutions and practices of science and technology in society, their impacts on
society, and their governance and regulation. STS emerged in the 1970s, and has established itself
as a field with departments and programs around the world, as well as specialized conferences
and journals.
STS is a loosely knit field, with a wide variety of contributing disciplines, such as sociology,
history, cultural studies, anthropology, policy studies, urban studies and economics. It is fair
to say, however, that it is dominated by sociological, historical and governance approaches.
Sociological approaches are concerned with an understanding of institutions, modes of
organization and practices of science and technology, and their interactions with other sectors
of society. Historical approaches study the historical development of science and technology
and the social context in which its institutions and actors operated.1 Governance approaches,
finally, investigate how science and technology and its impacts can be governed or managed
in society, by government agencies as well as by the private sector and other relevant actors
(Smits et al. 2010).
Several other fields exist that study some aspect or dimension of technology and its role
in society. They are either closely associated with STS, or have developed along a largely
separate trajectory. They include, amongst others, economics of technology, ergonomics,
material culture studies, internet psychology, design studies, technology management,
innovation management, and the philosophy of technology. I will now further introduce
one of these fields, the philosophy of technology. The philosophy of technology is a field
that, next to STS, aims to develop theories of technology and society of a general nature. It
is also the source of the theoretical perspective on technology that I will be developing in
Sections 3 and 4 of this chapter.
The philosophy of technology emerged in the course of the twentieth century, largely as
a response to the major impacts of technology on society during that century, many of them
perceived to be negative by philosophers. These include the unprecedented destruction and
carnage during the First and Second World Wars, the rationalization and automation of work
which brings alienation, the rise of a consumer culture that promotes materialism and shallow
consumption, and the destruction of the environment due to modern technology. Philosophers
like Martin Heidegger, Jacques Ellul, Herbert Marcuse and Günther Anders developed extensive
critiques of modern technology based on these perceived social consequences.
Since the 1990s, the broad critiques of these classical authors have made way for more
pragmatic and empirically oriented philosophical studies that aim to better understand specific
technologies and their role in society. This new orientation has been called the empirical turn in
the philosophy of technology (Kroes and Meijers 2000; Brey 2010a). Studies after the empirical
turn tend to be more descriptive, more informed by empirical results from their own case studies
and from empirical studies in other fields, more focused on concrete technologies and social
problems, less pessimistic about technology, and less determinist about technological change
and impacts of technology. In addition to this descriptivist empirical turn, the 1990s also saw
18

Theorizing technology’s role in crime and law

the emergence of ethics of technology as a major field of study, including new specializations
like computer ethics, nanoethics and ethics of design. Due to the empirical turn, the philosophy
of technology has moved closer to STS, a field from which it has incorporated methods and
ideas. In spite of this alignment, the philosophy of technology has largely retained a status
separate from that of STS.

What is technology?
Let us now turn to the insights into technology and society that can be gained from these fields.
A proper understanding of these matters should begin with an adequate understanding of the
concept of technology. Unfortunately, definitions of technology in dictionaries and professional
textbooks differ widely in their meaning and scope. Technology is variably defined as a process
of making things, a type of knowledge for making things, or the very things that are made
(Reydon 2012; Li-Hua 2009). In addition, many definitions hold that technology involves
the application of science to useful ends, but there are also definitions that make no reference
to science and define technology as the application of knowledge for practical ends, where
presumably this knowledge can be of any kind (Mitcham and Schatzberg 2009). Moreover,
some definitions hold that technology involves the manipulation of matter for practical ends,
whereas others merely hold that it involves the creation of practical value, so that presumably
applications of the social sciences would also qualify as technology (“social technology” or “soft
technology”) (Jin 2011).
Most commonly, however, technology is related to engineering, and definitions incorporate
three elements: technology is something that involves the manipulation of matter, has an
orientation towards practical ends, and has a basis in the sciences. Technology can, according
to this conception, be defined as the development, through the application of science and
mathematics, of physically defined or implemented means (devices, systems, methods,
procedures) that can serve practical ends. This assumes that technology is the mere application
of science, whereas convincing arguments have been made that, although science is applied
in engineering, engineering also involves the application and creation of unique engineering
knowledge, which is a highly formalized, evidence-based and systematic type of knowledge
(Vincenti 1990). So probably the definition should be amended to hold that technology is
developed through the application of science, mathematics and engineering knowledge.2
This definition of technology characterizes it as a process that is carried out by engineers
and applied scientists. However, in other contexts, “technology” appears to refer instead to the
means created in this process, as when it is said that a store sells office technology, or to a form
of knowledge, namely knowledge of the techniques for the production of artifacts and other
useful means. Technology is hence defined as a process, a set of objects, or form of knowledge,
depending on context (Mitcham 1994).
Subclasses of technology are often defined in relation to engineering branches. The main
branches of engineering are chemical engineering, civil engineering, electrical engineering
and mechanical engineering, and they produce chemical, civil, electrical and mechanical
technologies, respectively. More specialized branches, such as software engineering and
biomedical engineering, also yield corresponding technologies. Note that engineering branches
are sometimes defined in terms of technological features (e.g. mechanical engineering), and
sometimes in terms of application areas (e.g. environmental engineering).
For a consideration of consequences of technology for society, the most relevant aspects of it
are not technological knowledge or technology development processes carried out by engineers,
but rather the technological products that result from engineering: devices, systems, procedures
19

Philip Brey

and methods that are used for practical purposes and through this use, impact society. The
products of technology development are of two basic kinds: objects (tools, devices, systems)
and instructions for carrying out processes (procedures, methods). The latter includes methods
and procedures for processes like food irradiation, iron smelting and automated assembly of laser
diodes. The focus of theorists has, however, mostly been on the objects produced by engineers:
technological artifacts, which are the physical products of technology.
The notion of a “technological artifact” or “technological product” is usually associated
with electronic and technologically complex devices, such as computers, mobile phones and
automobiles. However, there are many human-made products that are the result of sciencebased technological production processes but that are not themselves machines or electronic
devices. A nylon jacket is not generally seen as a piece of technology; it is not a device with
mechanical parts and does not run on electricity. However, it is a technological artifact in the
sense that it is a product of advanced technological processes of production of nylon polymers out
of chemical compounds which are subsequently mechanically melted, spun and fused together
into wearable items. Most products that people buy in stores are technological artifacts in this
sense, including hammers, cups, tables and even many foods. It is often difficult to distinguish
between technologically produced artifacts and craft-based artifacts; a wooden chair could be
of either type. For this reason, theorists sometimes for convenience refer to any human-made
artifact as a technological artifact, although in other contexts it may be appropriate to restrict
the scope to engineering-based products, machines or electronic devices.
The most exemplary class of technological artifacts consists of (electronic) machines. A
machine is a tool that consists of parts with different functions and that receives energy from
a source and transforms it, through the interoperation of its parts, into useful actions. In the
evolution of technology, one sees the evolution from simple tools and devices to mechanical
machines (machines powered by natural forces like wind and water, or human and animal
labor), followed by electrical machines (powered by electricity, or converting mechanical to
electric energy), electronic machines (electric machines with active electrical components)
and computing machines (electronic machines in which the store and flow of electrons is
interpreted as information).
New technologies and fields of engineering emerge regularly, and new technological
products and methods, often incorporating multiple technologies, are developed at an ever
increasing rate. The constant emergence of new technologies means that technologies exist in
society at different stages. A rough distinction can be made between entrenched and emerging
technologies. Entrenched technologies are established technologies with long histories that have
yielded many products that are broadly used in society. Automotive technology is an example.
Emerging technologies are new technologies that have not yet yielded many concrete products and
applications, if any, and that are still mostly defined in terms of fundamental research. Examples
are nanotechnology (although it is yielding more applications every year) and synthetic biology.
This distinction is important because in assessing future impacts of technology on society,
one should not only consider innovations within entrenched technologies, but also potential
applications of emerging technologies.

The mutual shaping of technology and society
Majority support has emerged in STS and philosophy of technology for a number of positions
concerning the way in which technology is developed and interacts with society, which I will
now attempt to spell out. A first point of agreement is that technology does not evolve in a
deterministic fashion, but rather evolves along a path that is strongly influenced by a wide
20

Theorizing technology’s role in crime and law

variety of social factors. Technology is socially shaped, meaning that technological change is
conditioned by social factors, and technological designs and functions are the outcome of social
processes rather than of internal standards of scientific-technological rationality (Mackenzie and
Wajcman 1999).
The social shaping thesis denies the technological determinist idea that technological change
follows a fixed, linear path that can be explained by reference to some inner technological ‘logic,’
or perhaps through economic laws. Instead, technological change is radically underdetermined
by such constraint, and involves technological controversies, disagreements and difficulties, that
involve different actors or relevant social groups that engage in strategies to shape technology
according to their own insights. The thesis implies that technologies will evolve differently in
different societies (assuming that they are developed separately in them), and that society can
exert strong influence over the way in which technologies develop.
Against a linear path model of technological change, proposals have been made for a variation
and selection model, according to which technological change is multidirectional: there are always
multiple varieties of particular design concepts; some die, and others, which have a good fit
with social context, survive (e.g. Pinch and Bijker 1987; Ziman 2000; Brey 2008). Many studies
have been performed to show how users, regulators, civil society organizations and other actors
affect the development and design of technology and the way in which technological artifacts
are interpreted and used (Bijker et al. 1987; MacKenzie and Wajcman 1999; Oudshoorn and
Pinch 2003).
Theorists also agree that the meaning and use of technologies is not pre-given, but that
instead technology has interpretive flexibility, meaning that technological products can be
interpreted and used in different ways (Pinch and Bijker 1987). Different actors in society
will attribute different meanings, functions and uses to technologies, and engage in processes
of social negotiation. If such negotiations are successful, they come to a close and interpretive
flexibility diminishes because the technology is said to stabilize, along with its co-evolved
meanings and social relations. This implies the embedding of the technology in a stable network
consisting of humans and other technologies, and the acceptance of a dominant framework
on how to interpret and use the technology. It implies that the contents of the technology are
‘black-boxed’ and no longer a site for controversy, although black boxes can be opened at any
time. The history of technology shows how artifacts like the telephone, the Internet and the
automobile take on particular functions and societal roles that vary from time to time and from
place to place.
A second major point of agreement between scholars of technology is that society is shaped by
technology, meaning that technologies shape their social contexts. This is converse to the earlier
claim that technology is socially shaped. The claim is not just that particular uses of technology
have an influence of society, but also that technological innovations and products themselves
shape their social contexts. This claim goes against a naïve conception of technology as a neutral
means that does not itself affect society, and according to which it is the choices made by its users
that determine its impacts on society (Feenberg 2002). The technological shaping thesis holds
that technological innovations and products engender a multiplicity of functions, meanings and
effects that always, often quite subtly, accompany their use. Technologies become part of the
fabric of society, of its social structure and culture, and have a deep and lasting impact on social
structure and human behavior (Callon 1987; Latour 1992). Naturally, such an impact could also
involve effects on criminality and responses to this.
The idea that society is technologically shaped means, according to many scholars, that
technology seriously affects social roles and relations, political arrangements, organizational
structures, and cultural beliefs and practices. Scholars have argued that technical artifacts
21

Philip Brey

sometimes have built-in political consequences (Winner 1980), that they may contain gender
biases (Wajcman 1991), that they may subtly guide the behavior of their users (Sclove 1995;
Latour 1992), that they may support or hinder the realization and implementation of moral
values and norms (Brey 2010b), that they may presuppose certain types of users and may fail to
accommodate non-standard users (Akrich 1992) and that they may modify fundamental cultural
categories used in human thought (Akrich 1992; Turkle 1984).
Let us consider some examples. Bruno Latour (1992) has aimed to show how mundane
artifacts, like seat belts and hotel keys, induce their users towards certain behaviors. A hotel
key, for example, has heavy weights attached to them in an attempt to compel hotel guests to
bring their key to the reception desk upon leaving their room. Langdon Winner (1980) has
argued that nuclear power plants require centralized, hierarchical managerial control for their
proper operation, unlike, for example, solar energy technology. In this way, nuclear plants
shape society by requiring a particular mode of social organization for their operation.
Richard Sclove (1995) has pointed out that modern sofas with separate seat cushions
define distinct personal spaces, and thus work to both respect and perpetuate modern
Western culture’s emphasis on individuality and privacy, in contrast to Japanese futon sofabeds, for example. Sherry Turkle (1984), finally, discusses how computers and computer
toys affect conceptions of life, since due to their intelligent behavior, they lead children to
reassess the traditional dividing lines between ‘alive’ and ‘not alive’ and hence to develop a
different concept of ‘alive’. Most authors would not want to claim that technological artifacts
have inherent powers to affect such changes. Rather, it is technologies-in-use, technologies
that are already embedded in a social context and have been assigned an interpretation, that
generate such consequences.
To conclude, many scholars have proposed that the development of technologies, and
therefore these technologies themselves, is shaped by society, and that technological innovations
and products shape social and organizational structures and arrangements, and human practices
and beliefs. Taken together, these claims can be summarized to say that society and technology
co-shape or co-construct each other. Technological change is moreover held not to be linear
but to proceed through a quasi-evolutionary process of variation and selection. In addition,
technologies have interpretive flexibility, implying that their meanings, functions and capabilities
are constantly open to renegotiation by users and other social actors.

3. The extension view
Extension theories of technology provide a perspective on technology and its relation to
human beings that has significant explanatory power and that can be usefully applied in the
analysis of the role of technology in society. Extension theories are based on the idea that
technological artifacts can be understood as means that build upon, and extend, capabilities
of the human body and mind; they are extensions of the human organism. An analysis of
technology and its function in society should take into account how technological artifacts
extend, enhance, augment, supplement or replace human body parts and organs and their
capabilities. Classical versions of extension theory have been put forward in the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries by thinkers like Marshall McLuhan, Arnold Gehlen, Henry Bergson
and Ernst Kapp. In recent years, philosophers, including myself, have attempted to further
systematize and improve extension theory (Brey 2000, 2005; Lawson 2010; Heersmink 2012;
Steinert 2015).
The most influential classical version of extension theory has been put forward by Marshall
McLuhan. In his famous Understanding Media, subtitled The Extensions of Man, McLuhan depicts
22

Theorizing technology’s role in crime and law

technologies as extensions of human beings that extend beyond the skin and various body
parts and organs of humans (McLuhan 1964). McLuhan made a basic distinction between
two kinds of extensions: those of the body and those of cognitive functions, including the
senses, the central nervous system, and the brain. Extensions of the body are technologies
that augment or aid parts of the body that are used for acting on or protecting oneself from
the environment, or regulating bodily functions. These include our limbs, teeth, skin, and
bodily heat control systems. He theorized that during the mechanical age, technologies were
developed that extended our bodies: bows, spears and knives extended our hands, nails and
teeth; the wheel extended our feet; and clothing extended the function of bodily heat control
and protection of the skin.
During the electrical age, McLuhan claimed, our senses and central nervous system were
extended. He analyzed media as extensions of the senses, particularly those of sight and sound.
The radio and telephone are long-distant ears, and visual media are extensions of vision. Electric
media, in particular, are extensions of the information processing functions of the central nervous
system in that they take over functions of information management, storage and retrieval
normally performed by it. McLuhan foresaw another age of digital computer technology in
which creative cognition and higher thought, or “consciousness” is also extended and taken
over by technology. He envisioned that these cognitive functions would be automated and
translated into information functions performed by digital computers.
McLuhan’s account provides an interesting perspective on technologies as the externalization
and partial replacement of human bodily and mental faculties. However, when considered
as comprehensive theory of technology, there are problems with it. The main problem is
that McLuhan holds that every technological artifact is functionally similar to some human
organ and serves to augment or complement this organ’s function. There are, however, many
technological artifacts that appear to have functions that are not similar to any found in human
organs. For example, electric lighting serves to emit light, but there is no human organ that has
a similar function. Likewise, magnets, ionizers, roads and nuclear reactors do not seem to have
functional analogues in the human body or mind.
If not all technological artifacts extend human organs, can extension theory still be maintained?
I have proposed a version of it which categorizes all technological artifacts as extensions of the
person, but not necessarily in a one-on-one relation with human faculties (Brey 2000). In my
account, persons come equipped with a set of means, or capabilities, that is provided to them
by the unaided body and mind. Technological artifacts add to, or extend, this set of means.
Some do this by replicating, strengthening or enhancing means that are already present in the
human body and mind. Others do this by providing qualitatively new means to people, such as
the means to illuminate one’s environment, to fly, or to magnetize iron.
I have also emphasized, in my account, that by extending our means, technologies extend our
ability to attain ends, that is, to realize our intentions. Linking technology to human intention
is important because it helps explain the evolution and application of technology: technological
artifacts are developed and used because they are believed to help unaided persons realize their
intentions. My extension theory can therefore be summed up as follows: all technological
artifacts extend the set of naturally given means (i.e., human bodily and mental faculties) by
which human intentions are realized, either by replicating or augmenting human faculties, or
by introducing qualitatively novel capabilities.
I have since come to believe that this account, though true, is not complete, because
it ignores the fact that people are always situated in an environment, and in virtually any
environment, people have more means available to them than just their bodily and mental
faculties. Environments contain various elements that can also serve as means: natural objects
23

Philip Brey

such as rocks and plants, technological artifacts and infrastructures, and people and animals that
could serve as means to one’s ends. So in any given situation, the total set of means available
to a person does not just consist of those means provided by her body and mind and any
technological artifacts that she has in possession, but also includes the means that she has access
to in her environment. Therefore, any technological artifact that is provided to a person does
not merely extend the means provided to her by her faculties, but should rather be seen as
extending the set of means that is defined by the human faculties and environmental elements
that are available to her for use. The added value of a technological artifact for a person depends
on its added functionality relative to the already available set of means, and relative to the
intentions that the person wants to realize.
The fact that things in the environment other than technological artifacts can serve as means
to realize our intentions also serves to broaden the notion of extension. Many things can serve
to extend the abilities of the unaided body and mind, not just technological artifacts. Natural
objects are frequently used as means to realize our intentions: a rock is used to crack a nut, a tree
is used to provide us with wood for building a home. Other people can serve as a (temporary)
means to ends, when we ask someone to pass the salt or when we hire someone to do work for
us. In addition, we have devised modes of social organization and social expression that help us
realize our intentions. A language, for example, is a shared system of symbols and conventions
that help us communicate. Social roles and relations confer means to people that help them
reach ends. For example, someone’s appointment as teacher or accountant gives him the ability
to contribute to society with his skills and to earn an income. The establishment of a friendship
between persons provides them both with means to have rewarding interactions and to get
emotional and practical support.
Organizational and institutional structures, procedures, and regulations can also directly
or indirectly provide people with means that they otherwise would not have, including
means to reach joint ends, and to help direct one’s actions and make them more effective.
In addition, acquired knowledge and skills also serve to extend the means or abilities that
are available to persons. Acquired physical or social skills, like maintaining good balance,
typing, driving, speaking French, solving differential equations, or greeting people, can help
people further one’s intentions. The acquisition of (factual) knowledge has a similar role,
as it can help people make decisions, guide actions, and function as a useful resource for
others. It can be concluded that there are many things other than technological artifacts
that can serve to extend the set of means available to people to realize their intentions:
natural objects and structures, people and animals, social conventions and procedures, social
and organizational structures, and acquired knowledge and skills. Any consideration of the
function of a technological artifact for a person should consider how it adds to all of these
means that are already available to him or her.
Extension theory also needs to take into account that although the primary role of
technological artifacts is to serve as extensions for human users to further their intentions,
technological artifacts are also found in different roles. Notably, sometimes technological
artifacts are mere elements in the environment that are not used by persons to serve their ends.
For a particular person, a car or computer system owned by someone else may merely be an
encountered object that does not serve any ends for her, although it may indirectly benefit the
realization of her ends or harm them. Technological artifacts can also serve as (part of) the target
or goal of actions, rather than as a means by which goals are reached. They may be objects
that someone seeks to observe, study, damage, dispose of, repair, develop or acquire. In such
actions, the artifact does not serve as a means for realizing goals, but rather as an object at which
one’s means are directed.
24

Theorizing technology’s role in crime and law

Types of technological extensions
So far, I have only considered cases of technology use in which artifacts are used by one person
in order to further his or her intentions. However, artifacts can also be used by collectives and
organizations. For example, the roof, central heating system and sewer system of an apartment
building do not serve as means for one particular person, but rather serve as means for a group
or collective: the inhabitants of apartments in the building. Likewise, a computer network or
website used by an organization is not in place to serve the needs of any particular person, but
rather to serve the needs and objectives of the organization as a whole. The organization should
be seen as an agent with its own intentions and objectives, and technologies are used by it to
further these objectives.
A distinction therefore needs to be made between technological artifacts that serve as
individual extensions and those that function as collective and organization extensions, of groups and
organizations. Collective and organizational extensions are also used by individuals, and help
further their intentions. For example, the sewer system in an apartment building is also used
by its inhabitants considered as individuals, and employees of a firm make individual use of its
computer network, even when their intention in doing so is to further the objectives of the
firm. However, such individual uses derive from the collective or organizational function of
the artifact or system.
Note, also, that artifacts may serve different functions for different persons, collectives or
organizations at the same time, simultaneously extending them in different ways. For example,
an organization’s computer network may simultaneously serve the individual ends of employees
when they use it for private messaging. Seat belts protect drivers from physical harm, but
simultaneously also help protect insurers from financial loss. A pair of jeans extends the skin of
the wearer, but the logo it displays also furthers the intentions of the manufacturer by serving
as an advertisement of the brand. The latter two examples also show that an artifact can further
an agent’s intentions without the agent being an end-user of the artifact. Both the insurance
company and the jeans manufacturer have however taken prior actions to ensure that these
artifacts serve as means that further their ends, even if used by others.
Another useful distinction is between physical and social extensions, where physical extensions
extend physical capabilities of agents and social extensions extend social capabilities. A physical
capability is one that enables non-social physical actions such as cutting, transporting, repairing
and cooking. A social capability enables social actions, which are actions that have as their
primary intent to impact social phenomena, such as communicating, becoming friends, starting
an organization, taking up a new profession, firing someone, and purchasing something. Social
actions may centrally involve physical objects, as when someone purchases a dishwasher, but
what makes such action social is that they are about altering the socially constituted status of
such objects, which, in the case of the dishwasher, is its property relation to an owner.
Technological artifacts may either function as physical extensions, as social extensions, or as
both. Mechanical tools and devices, such as drills, automobiles, heaters, and binoculars, generally
serve as physical extensions. They extend physical capabilities of persons, including those
of physical manipulation and alteration, movement, temperature regulation and perception.
Technologies that function as social extensions depend on socially constructed meanings and
statuses that have been granted to them. As philosopher John Searle (1995) has argued, artifacts
can acquire powers that do not (solely) derive from their physical properties but rather from
collectively imposed status functions. Status functions are socially agreed meanings or statuses that
are bestowed upon things, events or persons in virtue of which they are able to perform certain
social function or roles. Dollar bills, for example, are able to function as a medium of exchange
25

Philip Brey

not because they have inherent physical powers to perform this function, but because people
have collectively assigned the function of being a medium of exchange to them. Without
this assigned function, dollar bills could not function as such. Likewise, a text editor can only
function as a text editor because people have agreed that the squiggles manipulated by them
constitute words and sentences that have meanings. Otherwise, it would only be a device for
manipulating meaningless squiggles.
Technological artifacts that constitute social extensions include information and
communication technologies, as well as other artifacts that are used to serve social, cultural,
organizational and institutional roles. A clock, for example, serves to display time, where time
is itself a social convention. Technological artifacts can also serve multiple physical and social
functions simultaneously. For example, an expensive car can have both a physical function of
transportation, and a social function of signaling status and wealth.
Within the class of physical and technological extensions, further distinctions can be made
between several subclasses. Within the class of physical extensions, artifacts can be distinguished
that have a function for physical action (e.g. cutting, welding, refining, heating), for transportation
(e.g. automobiles, airplanes), for perception (e.g. microscopes, telescopes), for regulation (e.g.
thermostats, cooling systems), and for protection (e.g. clothing, walls, landmines) against
others. Within the class of social extensions, some artifacts serve a communication function
(e.g. telephone), others an information function (e.g. web browser), and yet others may serve
functions of play, friendship, work collaboration, and creative expression, as well as various
organizational and institutional functions.
A special class is constituted by so-called cognitive artifacts (Brey 2005; Norman 1991) that
extend cognitive capabilities of persons and organizations. A cognitive artifact is an artifact
capable of displaying, storing, retrieving or operating upon information, and having this as
its primary function. Computers are, of course, cognitive artifacts, but so are thermometers,
newspapers, clocks, and measuring rods. Cognitive artifacts mainly belong to the class of social
extensions, because most of them depend on socially defined conventions to assign meanings
to signs and symbols. Arguably, one could also include devices like telescopes and hearing aids
that enhance perceptual information and that have been categorized as physical extensions.
Cognitive artifacts extend human cognitive function by extending human cognitive abilities like
memorization and information storage, interpretation, reasoning, calculating, and conceptual
thought.
In Brey (2005), I argued that computers initially qualified as cognitive artifact, since their
function in the 1960s and 1970s was to process and produce information within scientific
research, education, administration, and defense, amongst other fields. Since the introduction
of computers with graphical user interfaces and multimedia capabilities in the late 1970s and
early 1980s, and the World Wide Web in the early 1990s, computers acquired functions that
are noncognitive and non-informational, such as playing computer games, listening to and
composing music, watching movies, and communicating with other users. I call these activities
noncognitive and non-informational even though they involve cognition and information
processing. I do so because their primary function is not to process or display of information,
but rather to enable activities in which performance of these information functions is not the
central purpose.
So what is extended by computers when they adopt these noncognitive functions? All
kinds of abilities. Computers have become extremely versatile, multifunctional devices that can
perform or support many very different actions and processes, such as drawing, playing music,
banking, chatting, operating external devices like heating systems and refrigerators, and live
streaming of camera images from remote places. Almost any social action can be performed
26

Theorizing technology’s role in crime and law

with or mediated by a computer, like chatting, paying, becoming friends, and signing a
contract, and some physical actions, like playing music, watching movies, and turning one’s
heater up, can also be performed with computers. Computers have therefore become very
powerful technological extensions that replicate in virtual, informational form the capabilities
of ordinary technological artifacts and other extensions.

4. Crime and technological extensions
Extension theory can help illuminate the role of technology in crime and law enforcement.
I will now perform a general analysis of this role from the point of view of extension theory.
The analysis proceeds as follows. First, I will identify the main classes of actors in crime and law
enforcement, their intentions, and the relation between these intentions. Next, I will survey
and classify technologies used by these actors and their role in realizing the actor’s intentions.
Finally, I will provide a historical analysis of the role of technology in crime and law enforcement
that aims to assess how technologies strengthen the powers of criminals and law enforcement.
For the first step in the analysis, we will consider the main classes of actors in crime and
law enforcement, their intentions, and the relations between these intentions. The dialectic
of crime and law enforcement involves three main classes of actors: criminals, human crime
targets and law enforcement officers (cf. Cohen and Felson 1979). Let us consider them in
turn. Criminals are individuals that habitually or incidentally commit crimes. Crimes are acts
committed in violation of law and punishable by the state. A criminal normally has two kinds of
intentions relative to an impending criminal act. First, he normally has the intention to commit
the act in question. I say “normally”, because there are crimes in which the intent to commit
the act in question was not there, for example in involuntary manslaughter. I will not consider
such cases here. I will also restrict my discussion to cases in which the perpetrator knows that
the act he intends to commit is unlawful, even though there are cases of criminal behavior in
which the perpetrator is unaware that the act he commits is unlawful. In most cases, however,
the perpetrator has an intention to commit an act that he knows to be unlawful. This intention
is normally accompanied by a second intention, which is to escape punishment for committing
this act.
The second class of actors, within which I will make no further differentiations, is that of
law enforcement officers, by which I mean individuals sanctioned by the state to enforce the
law, particularly criminal law. This includes anyone with a state-sanctioned duty to prevent,
detect and investigate crimes and apprehend and persecute criminals. The intentions of law
enforcement officers directly oppose those of criminals. They aim to prevent unlawful acts
from being committed, and once such acts have been committed, they intend to ensure that
the perpetrator does not escape punishment for committing the act.
A third and final class that should be considered is that of people and organizations that are
targets of crime, and therefore its potential victims. Persons are potential targets of so-called
crimes against persons, such as murder, aggravated assault, rape and kidnapping. Both persons
and organizations are potential targets of crimes against property, such as burglary, larceny,
robbery, vandalism, arson and fraud. Crime targets have an interest and therefore normally an
intent to prevent themselves from being a victim of crimes against persons and against property.
In other words, they have an intent to prevent criminal acts from taking place with them or
their property as the target. They may also have an interest in the punishment of the perpetrators
once a criminal act has been committed against them, but this is not invariably the case.
In comparing the intents of criminals, law enforcement officers and human crime targets,
we see, first of all, that they have opposing intentions regarding the perpetration of criminal
27

Philip Brey

acts: criminals have an intent to commit criminal acts, law enforcement officers have an intent
to prevent criminal acts from being committed, and crime targets have an intent to prevent
criminal acts from being committed against them and their property.3 Second, criminals and
law enforcement officers have opposing intents regarding punishment: criminals have an intent
to escape punishment for criminal acts committed by them, whereas law enforcement officers
have an intent to ensure that such punishment is meted out.4
These intentions by the three classes of actors induce them to acquire and use technological
and non-technological extensions that are believed by them to make these intentions come
true. These extensions may include technological artifacts, knowledge, skills, persons who
provide assistance and support, social conventions and procedures, and social and organizational
structures. For example, to ensure a successful robbery of a liquor store, a criminal may mobilize
and use relevant technological artifacts (for example, a gun and a getaway car), knowledge (of
the layout of the liquor store, its security features, and its contents), skills (in using a gun, or
in breaking open a cash registry), accomplices (other persons who help in the holdup or drive
the getaway car), and social conventions and procedures (for example, hand signals that can be
made to accomplices, and agreed-on procedures for carrying out the robbery).

Technological extensions for and against crime
The technologies sought by criminals for their criminal pursuits come in two main types:
technologies for committing crimes, and technologies for escaping punishment.5 (Some
technologies may fall into both categories.) What the relevant technologies are in these categories
depends on the type of crime. Let us first consider technologies for committing crimes. These
are technological artifacts and processes that enable a criminal act to be committed at all or that
enable it to be committed more reliably, effectively and safely. (Premeditated) crimes against
persons, such as murder, aggravated assault and rape, may include technological artifacts to help
perpetrators get near the victim, to threaten or restrain them, to hide the crime from bystanders
and observers so that it is not interrupted, and to commit the physical act that constitutes
the crime. Crimes against property, such as burglary and robbery, include technologies to get
close to the crime target and get access to it, to avoid detection while doing so, to coerce or
restrain persons on the premises, and to transport the property to a safe place. Crimes against
society, finally, such as prostitution, narcotics violations, gambling and weapons law violations,
constitute a diverse group that involves a variety of technologies for committing the crime.6
Artifacts for committing crimes include the following:7
•
•
•
•
•
•

28

Artifacts for getting information about crime targets and for planning a crime: cameras,
eavesdropping equipment, hacking software, etc.
Artifacts for getting access to crime targets: burglary tools like crowbars, lock picks, bolt
cutters, torches, and explosives.
Artifacts to disable or block security systems and cameras: wire cutters, signal jammers,
hacking tools, etc.
Artifacts for threatening, restraining or coercing persons: knives, guns, handcuffs, sedatives,
artifacts such as nude photos that are used for blackmail, etc.
Artifacts for maintaining communication between criminals: mobile telephones, computers,
etc.
For cybercrime: software tools and services for breaking into computers, causing damage,
and stealing data, such as exploit kits, botnets, fake fingerprint kits and Trojan horses.

Theorizing technology’s role in crime and law

Artifacts for escaping punishment include the following:
•

•

Artifacts for preventing, altering, destroying, concealing or falsifying physical evidence
(fingerprints, tire tracks, bodies, DNA, camera images, physical evidence of break-in, etc.):
gloves, masks, cleaning products, disposable phones, data-erasing software, encryption
software, web anonymizers, artifacts that are used to manufacture or constitute false
evidence (e.g. fabricated DNA evidence, false Internet alibis, a murder weapon planted on
a victim to suggest suicide), etc.
Artifacts for a secure escape from a crime scene or from a police pursuit: fast cars, weapons,
bullet-proof vests, mobile phones, door reinforcements (in hideouts), alarm systems, false
digital trails, etc.

Criminals have increasingly powerful technologies at their disposal to effectively commit crimes
and escape punishment for them. The technologies used in law enforcement have exactly the
opposite aim: preventing crime and ensuring that criminals are punished for their crimes. Their
first intent, that of preventing crime, is aided by artifacts that include the following:
•

•

•

Databases with information on crime targets, (potential) criminals, and the possession and
the distribution of (illegal) means for committing crimes, which help law enforcement
determine where to mobilize its resources to prevent crime.
Artifacts that aid live surveillance and investigation of (potential) criminals, their preparatory
activities, and crime targets: surveillance cameras, wiretaps, satellite feeds, live maps,
helicopters, etc.
Artifacts for hardening crime targets against crime (to the extent that this is seen as the
responsibility of law enforcement): locks, fences, alarm system, firewalls, etc.

The intent of punishing crime is aided by artifacts such as the following:
•

•
•

Artifacts to support the detection, processing and matching of physical evidence: fingerprint
kits, cameras, databases (for convicts and their fingerprints and DNA data, licensed drivers,
stolen and found property, vehicles, and so forth), etc.
Artifacts for effectively locating and interrogating witnesses and suspects: GPS trackers,
databases, lie detectors, etc.
Artifacts for the pursuit and apprehension of suspects: fast police cars, weapons, bullet-proof
armor, two-way radios, arrest cars, thermal imaging cameras, battering rams, handcuffs, etc.

Crime targets, finally, invest in artifacts and systems that prevent them from becoming the
victim of crimes. They do not normally engage in surveillance of potential criminals and
criminal activity, but focus on the immediate protection of themselves and their property.
Artifacts used therein may include the following:
•
•

Artifacts for physically protecting oneself and one’s property and for deterrence: weapons,
locks, fences, firewalls, reinforcements, safe rooms, etc.
Artifacts for surveillance of crime targets and for signaling criminal activity: surveillance
cameras, alarm systems, etc.

The employment of these technological artifacts by criminals, law enforcement and human crime
targets should be understood as part of their strategies to optimize the set of means (extensions)
29

Philip Brey

that they have available to realize their intentions. Since these intentions are diametrically
opposed between criminals on the one hand and law enforcement and human crime targets on
the other, we see that an increase in one party’s capability of realizing its intentions corresponds
with a decrease in the opposing party’s capability of realizing its intentions. This decrease is
either achieved by employing means that can damage or destroy the opposing party’s means
(e.g. wire cutters that incapacitate an alarm), means that leave opposing means intact but that
create conditions to render them less effective or irrelevant (e.g. a bullet-proof vest that partially
neutralizes the advantage of a gun, a signal-jamming device, gloves that make fingerprint
collection irrelevant), and means that otherwise add new capabilities that cannot be effectively
countered at the time (e.g. a Trojan horse that can pass through any firewall).
The process of adding better and better means that iteratively negate the advantage of the
opposing parties or exploits their weaknesses makes the process of extension resemble an arms
race (Ekblom 1997). As criminals equip themselves with better, more powerful technological
and other extensions to support their criminal intent, law enforcement and human crime targets
respond in kind, and vice versa. This includes the iterative development and deployment of
technologies to thwart the advantage of the opponent: criminals build Trojan horses to infect
computers, which are then countered by firewalls, which are then in turn countered by Trojan
horses that can disable or circumvent firewalls, etc. What one sees in countries in which crime is
rampant is that criminals have won the arms race between criminals and law enforcement: they
have the best technologies, modes of organization, information, training for skills, and other
extensions. This, however, is not to say that systemic corruption, social deprivation, or high
levels of inequality might not also contribute to high crime societies.

The evolving impact of technology on crime and law enforcement
To expand the above analysis, I will now briefly consider the evolution of technologies for
crime and law enforcement in historical perspective, from the point of view of extension
theory. Throughout history, technological advances have altered the targets of crime, the
kinds of crimes that are committed against them, the ways in which they are committed, and
the way in which law enforcement operates to prevent and respond to these crimes. Prior
to the late nineteenth century, the means for protecting crime targets mostly consisted of
physical devices and structures like locks, fences, and weapons, and surveillance was limited
to observation by law enforcement officers walking the streets and limited keeping of physical
records that were difficult to search and reproduce. There was no developed forensic science,
and so persecution of crimes based on physical evidence was often difficult, which frequently
made it difficult to persecute crimes at all. In this context, societies tended to choose harsh
methods of punishment, often in public, as a deterrent and used torture to extract confessions.
In this way, the lack of other means of law enforcement to prevent crime and persecute
criminals could be partially redressed.
Crime and law enforcement entered a new stage in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries,
with the introduction of electric and electronic devices and the establishment in the early
twentieth century of forensic science. Electricity and electronics gave electronic communications,
which benefited both criminals and law enforcement, and electronic surveillance, which
mainly benefited the latter. Advances in forensics gave law enforcement powerful new tools
for apprehending and persecuting criminals. On balance, the new technologies benefited law
enforcement more than they did criminals. However, the increasing complexity of society,
especially of cities, and the rise of organized crime (which constitutes a type of social extension of
30

Theorizing technology’s role in crime and law

the individual criminal) partially offset this advantage. Many of the technological products of the
twentieth century also became targets of crime themselves, because of their value and expense.
Products like cars, televisions and stereos became prime targets of theft.
With the introduction of computers in society in the twentieth century, computer crime
became an issue. Its real breakthrough came in the 1990s, with the emergence of the Internet
as a mass medium. The emergence of the Internet and computer networks made it possible for
criminals to break into computers from a distance and therefore made computer crime much
easier than it was before their emergence. Computer crime, or cybercrime, is crime in which
the computer is used as a target or tool. The emergence of information technology has not
only resulted in computer hardware becoming a target of crime (e.g. computers, smartphones,
tablets) but also software and data have become a frequent crime target (e.g. digitally encoded
credit card numbers, electronic money, downloadable digital content, personal information
records and personal identities). When persons and organizations are the target of cybercrime,
or when society is the target, the computer functions as a tool rather than the target (Wall 2007;
Brenner 2010). Computers are nowadays used as tools for a wide variety of crimes, such as
harassment, extortion, identity theft, drug trafficking, and child pornography.
As argued in Section 3, computers reproduce in electronic form many social actions, objects,
practices and institutions, from communicating to listening to music to banking. The Internet
has become itself a kind of society, an electronic environment in which people work, play,
form social relations, and engage in many of the practices that they also engage in in physical
environments. It is for this reason that cybercrime should not be understood as just a new type
of crime on top of all the others. Because the institutions and structures of society have moved
for a significant part online, the Internet has become the new frontier for a broad range of
previously existing criminal pursuits, including theft, fraud, extortion, harassment, vandalism,
prostitution, child pornography, drug trafficking, and many more.
Cybercrime is more difficult to combat than ordinary crime. In cybercrime, criminals are
able to maintain a large distance between themselves and the crime scene (McGuire 2009;
Yar 2013). They have strong means for remaining undetected and erasing their tracks, such as
anonymizers, strong encryption software, and darknets. Criminal law is usually running behind
the latest technological developments and cybercrime often crosses international legal borders,
which requires strong international cooperation between law enforcement agents. Internet
service providers often do not want to cooperate to protect the privacy of their clients, and laws
that protect civil liberties may limit the abilities of law enforcement to do surveillance. Law
enforcement has in recent years made heavy investments in means to fight cybercrime, which
include setting up monitoring systems and databases to track and investigate suspicious activity
over digital networks; strong collaborations between jurisdictions and the private sector; gaining
access to national and global surveillance programs for espionage and combating terrorism
such as ECHELON; and efforts to outlaw software tools and practices that aid cybercrime.
Nevertheless, cybercriminals are still at an advantage.
Although law enforcement is still at a disadvantage on the playing field for cybercrime,
information technology has given it powerful tools to combat ordinary (non-computer) crimes.
The creation of large, searchable databases for individuals, past crimes, and forensic evidence,
and the introduction of data mining techniques have provided law enforcement with powerful
tools to track and sometimes even predict crime. Security cameras, sometimes equipped with
facial recognition and other tracking software, have provided new sources of evidence and
detection. Information technology has also made new forensic techniques possible, such
as odor-detecting devices that can find buried human bodies and imaging technologies for
examining hidden features in documents. On the whole, information technology may have
31

Philip Brey

given law enforcement the advantage in ordinary crime, but it has opened up a new frontier of
cybercrime where criminals have the advantage.

5. Conclusion
This chapter had two objectives: to review the major theories and approaches for the analysis
of the role of technology in society, and to introduce a particular theory within this category
– extension theory – and apply it to an analysis of the role of technology in crime and law
enforcement. The review was carried out in Section 2. There, I introduced and reviewed the
fields of science and technology studies (STS) and the philosophy of technology, which are
arguably the two fields most concerned with providing general theories of technology and
its relation to society. I reviewed discussions of the nature of technology and technological
artifacts, and of the ways in which society impacts the development of technology, and
technology impacts social practices and institutions. Some main findings were that technology
development is not a linear, deterministic process but involves an evolutionary process of
variation and selection that is shaped by social factors and interests, that technological artifacts
have interpretive flexibility and have different meanings and uses for different actors, and that
technologies are not neutral but shape their social context, including human behaviors and
practices, social and political arrangements and institutions, and human culture.
In Sections 2 and 3, I introduced the extension theory of technology, as a powerful account
for the analysis of the role of technology in society, and I applied it to the analysis of crime and
law enforcement. The extension theory holds that technological artifacts should be analyzed as
means that extend the ability of persons, groups and organizations to carry out their intentions
or goals, along with non-technological extensions such as skills, knowledge, human resources,
and organizational structures. Analyses of the role of technological artifacts as extensions,
or added means, for realizing intentions can provide for assessments of the added value of
technology in certain practices and of assessments of the way in which technologies transform
and improve these practices.
In the analysis of the role of technology in crime and law enforcement, it was found that
criminals on the one hand and law enforcement and human crime targets on the other have
diametrically opposed objectives. Technological artifacts used by these groups, such as guns,
Trojan horses, surveillance databases and alarm systems, were analyzed as means that are added to
an existing set of means and that, in relation to this set, may or may not enhance the ability of one
group to reach its objectives and weaken the ability of the opposing group. I ended with a brief
analysis of different stages in the evolution of the role of technology in crime and law enforcement,
including the introduction of electric and electronic technology and the establishment of forensic
science in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and the introduction of information
technology and cybercrime in the late twentieth century. I hope to have shown that extension
theory provides a powerful tool for the analysis and assessment of the role of technology in crime
and law enforcement that invites further studies within its framework.

Notes
1 In Chapter 2 of this volume, M. R. McGuire offers one of the few socio-legal/criminological accounts
of the historical development of technology crime and control.
2 Another problem with the definition is that it does not allow for the creation of technological means
that are not based in science, even though there seem to be cases of technological invention that are
not science-based, such as James Watt’s invention of the steam engine, which was hardly based on
scientific principles. This example shows that it is difficult to arrive at a definition of technology that
32

Theorizing technology’s role in crime and law

3
4

5
6
7

captures all of our intuitions. However, even if Watt’s invention did not, twentieth- and twentyfirst-century technology invariably finds its basis in science, mathematics, and formalized engineering
knowledge.
McCord (2004) offers some good discussions of the role of intentions in offending.
There are additional, less influential, intentions that shape the extensions of the three classes of actors.
For example, it is an intention of society as a whole that law enforcement does not abuse its powers.
The extensions of law enforcement are to some extent shaped to prevent such abuse. For example,
some jurisdictions nowadays require police to wear bodycams, motivated in large part for their ability
to expose police abuses.
There is not an extensive literature on the technologies of crime and control, but notable works
include Byrne and Rebovich (2007), McGuire (2012), and Marx (2016).
The classification of crimes into crimes against persons, against property and against society is taken
from the classification system used in the United States (National Incident Based Reporting System).
The notion of artifact is conceived broadly to include both technological and non-technological
products.

References
Akrich, M. (1992). The De-Scription of Technical Objects, in Bijker, W., and Law, J. (eds), Shaping
Technology/Building Society: Studies in Sociotechnical Change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bijker, W., Hughes, T., and Pinch, T. (eds) (1987). The Social Construction of Technological Systems: New
Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brenner, S.W. (2010). Cybercrime: Criminal Threats from Cyberspace. Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger.
Brey, P. (2000). Theories of Technology as Extension of Human Faculties, in Mitcham, C. (ed.),
Metaphysics, Epistemology, and Technology. Research in Philosophy and Technology, vol. 19. London:
Elsevier/JAI Press.
Brey, P. (2005). The Epistemology and Ontology of Human-Computer Interaction. Minds and Machines,
15, 3–4: 383–98.
Brey, P. (2008). Technological Design as an Evolutionary Process, in Vermaas, P., Kroes, P., Light, A. and
Moore, S. (eds), Philosophy and Design: From Engineering to Architecture. Springer (Netherlands).
Brey, P. (2010a). Philosophy of Technology after the Empirical Turn. Techné: Research in Philosophy and
Technology, 14, 1: 36–48.
Brey, P. (2010b), Values in Technology and Disclosive Computer Ethics, in Floridi. L. (ed.), The Cambridge
Handbook of Information and Computer Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 41–58.
Byrne, J.M., and Rebovich, D.J. (2007). The New Technology of Crime, Law and Social Control. Monsey,
NY: Criminal Justice Press.
Callon, M. (1987). Society in the Making: The Study of Technology as a Tool for Sociological Analysis,
in Bijker, W., Hughes, T. and Pinch, T. (eds), The Social Construction of Technological Systems: New
Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cohen, L.E. and Felson, M. (1979). Social change and crime rate trends: A routine activity approach.
American Sociological Review, 44, 4: 588–608.
Ekblom, P (1997). Gearing up against crime: A dynamic framework to help designers keep up with the
adaptive criminal in a changing world, International Journal of Risk, Security and Crime Prevention, 2, 4:
249–65.
Feenberg, A. (2002). Transforming Technology: A Critical Theory Revisited. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hackett, E., Amsterdamska, O., Lynch, M. and Wajcman, J. (eds) (2007). The Handbook of Science and
Technology Studies, 3rd edition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Heersmink, R. (2012). Defending extension theory: A response to Kiran and Verbeek, Philosophy &
Technology, 25, 1: 121–8.
Jin, Z. (2011). Global Technological Change. From Hard Technology to Soft Technology, 2nd ed. Bristol, UK
and Portland, USA: Intellect Books.
Kroes, P. and Meijers, A. (eds) (2000). The Empirical Turn in the Philosophy of Technology. Amsterdam: JAI.
Latour, B. (1992). Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a few mundane artifacts, in Bijker,
W., and Law, J. (eds), Shaping Technology/Building Society: Studies in Sociotechnical Change. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

33

Philip Brey

Lawson, C. (2010). Technology and the extension of human capabilities, Journal for the Theory of Social
Behaviour, 40, 2: 207–23.
Li-Hua, R. (2009): Definitions of Technology, in Olsen, J.K.B., Pedersen, S.A., and Hendricks, V.F.
(eds), A Companion to the Philosophy of Technology. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 18–22.
MacKenzie, D., and Wajcman, J. (eds) (1999). The Social Shaping of Technology, 2nd edn, Open University
Press.
Marx, G.T. (2016). Windows into the Soul: Surveillance and Society in an Age of High Technology. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
McCord, J. (2004). Beyond empiricism: Institutions and Intentions in the Study of Crime. New Brunswick, N.J:
Transaction Publishers.
McGuire, M. (2009). Hypercrime: The New Geometry of Harm. Oxford: Routledge-Cavendish.
McGuire, M. (2012). Technology, Crime & Justice: The Question Concerning Technomia. Oxford: Routledge,
Taylor & Francis.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. New York: The New American
Library, Inc.
Mitcham, C. (1994). Thinking through Technology: The Path Between Engineering and Philosophy. University
of Chicago Press.
Mitcham, C., and Schatzberg, E. (2009). Defining Technology and the Engineering Sciences, in Gabbay,
D.M., Meijers, A., and Woods, J. (eds), Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences, Vol. 9.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 27–65.
Norman, D. (1991). Cognitive Artifacts, in Carroll, J. (ed.), Designing Interaction: Psychology at the HumanComputer Interface. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Oudshoorn, N., and Pinch, T. (eds) (2003). How Users Matter: The Co-Construction of Users and Technology.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pinch, T., and Bijker, W. (1987). The Social Construction of Facts and Artifacts: Or How the Sociology
of Science and the Sociology of Technology Might Benefit Each Other, in Bijker, W., Hughes, T.,
and Pinch, T. (eds), The Social Construction of Technological Systems: New Directions in the Sociology and
History of Technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 17–50.
Reydon, T.A.C. (2012). Philosophy of Technology, in Fieser, J. and Dowden, B. (eds), Internet Encyclopedia
of Philosophy.
Sclove, R. (1995). Democracy and Technology. New York: Guilford Press.
Searle, J.R. (1995). The Construction of Social Reality. New York: Free Press.
Sismondo, S. (2009). An Introduction to Science and Technology Studies, 2nd ed. Toronto: Wiley-Blackwell.
Smits, R., Kuhlmann, S., and Shapira, P. (eds) (2010). The Theory and Practice of Innovation Policy. An
International Research Handbook. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Steinert, S. (2015). Taking stock of extension theory of technology, Philosophy & Technology, 1–18. doi:
10.1007/s13347-014-0186-3.
Turkle, S. (1984). The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Vincenti, W. (1990). What Engineers Know and How They Know It: Analytical Studies from Aeronautical
History. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Wajcman, J. (1991). Feminism Confronts Technology. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Wall, D.S. (2007). Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age. Cambridge, UK: Polity
Press.
Winner, L. (1980). Do artifacts have politics? Daedalus, 109: 121–36.
Yar, M. (2013). Cybercrime and Society. London: Sage Publications.
Ziman, J. (ed.) (2000). Technological Innovation as an Evolutionary Process. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

34

