Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
North Carolina State University
CHE 330

Evaluation of Fluidized Bed Characteristics

1. Introduction
A fluidized bed is a mass of solid particles suspended by the upward movement of a fluid (often
a gas). The suspended fluidized particles collectively behave as a liquid, significantly changing
the transport phenomena and thermodynamic properties of the material. Mass and heat transfer
are rapid due to the vigorous mixing of particles, allowing for nearly uniform temperature and
concentration distributions throughout the bed. These characteristics make fluidized beds ideal
for use in many areas of engineering, including petroleum refining, chemical synthesis and
combustion.
2. Objective
The objective of this experiment is to determine fluidization characteristics and heat transfer
properties for a fluidized bed of Al2O3 particles.
3. Theory
An overview of a fluidized bed is shown in Figure 1. The solid particles in the bed are pulled
toward the ground by the force of gravity. The terminal velocity (ut), i.e. the maximum velocity
able to be achieved by a solid particle due to gravity, is given by
ut =

(ρ − ρ )gd
s

g

p

2

18µ

Figure 1. Overview of fluidized bed operation (adapted from [1]).
* M. Cooper and K. Dickey, Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, revised January 8, 2018.

(1)

where ρs is bulk solid density, ρg is gas density, g is the gravitational acceleration constant (9.8
m/s2), dp is particle diameter and μ is gas viscosity.
In contrast to the force of gravity, gas flow entering from the bottom of the bed imparts an
upward force to the particles. Once the upward pressure force of the gas flow on the particles is
greater than the downward pull of gravity, the particles will begin to rise and float. This force
balance is described by [2]
∆P = (ρ s − ρ g )(1 − ε )gL

(2)

where ΔP is pressure drop across the particle bed, ε is the void fraction of the particle bed, and L
is the height of the bed.
Pressure drop across a packed bed can be estimated by the Ergun equation [2]:
1.75 ρ g (1 − ε ) 2
∆P 150 µ (1 − ε )
u0
u0 −
=
2
3
dp
L
ε
ε3
dp
2

(3)

The gas velocity (typically referred to as superficial gas velocity, u0) where upward force on the
particles overcomes downward force is known as the minimum fluidization velocity (umf) which
can be calculated theoretically by combining Equations 2 and 3:

g (ρ s − ρ g ) =

150 µ (1 − ε mf )
2

d p ε mf

3

u mf +

1.75 ρ g
d p ε mf

3

u mf

2

(4)

where εmf, the void fraction of the particle bed at minimum fluidization, is given by [3]

ε mf = 1 −

ρs
ρp

(5)

where ρp is the particle density. Note that for most solid particles ρp is larger than ρs since ρs
measures the bulk density of the solid (solid + voids) while ρp is the density of only the particle
itself.
The value of umf for a bed of particles can also be determined empirically by examining pressure
drop behavior of the bed as a function of u0; this plot of u0 vs. ΔP is known as a “fluidization
curve.” Fluidization curves tend to have the shape found in Figure 2. The u0 value where
pressure drop becomes fairly constant is the empirical umf. Empirical umf values often vary
significantly from theoretical values due to non-ideal mixing, especially for small laboratoryscale fluidized beds.
At superficial gas velocities above umf, the particle bed becomes fluidized and the gas-solid
mixture begins to behave like a liquid. As u0 increases, the behavior of the fluidized bed changes,

Figure 2. Typical fluidization curve indicating an approximate umf of 0.025 – 0.035 m/s. The
solid line indicates data taken with increasing fluid speed, while the dashed line indicates
data taken with decreasing fluid speed [3].
proceeding through different fluidization regimes as indicated in Figure 1. A brief description of
each regime is given in order of increasing u0:
1) Packed bed regime (u0 below umf) – no particle fluidization
2) Smooth regime – small bubbles are seen exiting the surface of the bed, but in general the
particles are not vigorously mixed. Operation in the smooth regime is ideal for powdercoating applications [4].
3) Bubbling regime – numerous bubbles of significant size can be seen emerging from the
bed and the suspended particles are vigorously mixed. Mass and heat transfer rates within
the bed are higher than for the smooth regime. Operation in the bubbling regime is typical
for many high-temperature exothermic reactions using heterogeneous catalysts.
4) Slugging regime – very large bubbles causing significant voids within the bed begin to
emerge from the surface.
5) Pneumatic transport – one very large bubble is formed which displaces the entire bed of
particles and conveys the bed downstream.
Fluidization characteristics for a given bed of particles also vary depending on bulk properties of
the particle, which plays a crucial role in determining the feasibility of application of fluidized
beds in industry. Particles are classified into four different groups (known as “Geldart groups”),
as described in Figure 3 [4]:
•

Group A – Non-agglomerating low-density particles between 30 and 100 μm. Particles
readily aerate and fluidize easily (example: FCC catalyst).

Figure 3. Geldart classification of particles in ambient air [4]. Region A’ is a
range of properties for well-behaved Fluidized Catalytic Cracking (FCC) catalyst. [4]
•
•
•

Group B – Rigid particles between 100 and 1000 μm. Ideal for fluidization, bubbles form
quickly to produce vigorous bubbling under proper conditions (example: sand).
Group C – Cohesive low-density particles between 0 and 30 μm. Interparticle forces
exceed that from gravity or rising gas, producing clumping during fluidization (example:
flour).
Group D – Dense particles above 1000 μm which “spout” rather than achieving ideal
fluidization (example: coffee beans).

Generally, only Group A and B powders are considered for fluidized beds in industrial
applications.
Fluidization characteristics impact rates of mass and heat transfer within the bed. In particular,
heat transfer properties of the fluidized bed vary significantly due to factors including:
• fluid and particle properties
• superficial gas velocity
• Geldart particle classification

The coefficient of heat transfer (α) for the fluidized bed can be calculated from empirical
observations by Equation 6:

α exp =

Q
Ah ∆T

(6)

where αexp is the empirical fluid bed heat transfer coefficient, Q is heater power, Ah is the surface
area of the heater, and ΔT is represented by

∆T = Th − Tbed

(7)

where Th is the heater temperature and Tbed is the fluid bed temperature [4].
4. Experimental
4.1. Equipment
The fluidized bed apparatus used in experimentation is shown in Figure 4. A glass cylinder
(labeled “1”) with a 95 cm2 cross-section contains a bed of α-Al2O3 particles (labeled “2”, dp =
100 μm, ρp = 4000 kg/m3, ρs = 1760 kg/m3). Compressed air enters the unit from a house air line
regulated to a pressure of approximately 6 bar. A throttling valve (V2) is used to control inlet
pressure, which is monitored using a pressure gauge (P3). Air flow rate is controlled by a needle
valve (V1) and measured using a rotameter (F1) before reaching a gas distributor chamber
(labeled “3”) below the bed. Pressure in the gas distributor chamber is measured using a pressure
gauge (P2). A rupture disk (V3) is used as a safety device to limit pressure in the gas distributor
to 0.5 bar.
Above the gas distributor chamber is a porous sintered metal frit used to distribute gas evenly
across the bottom of the bed. The rising air fluidizes the α-Al2O3 bed and exits the cylinder
through filters (labeled “4”) to prevent particle carryover. An adjustable 100 W heated cylinder
(labeled “5,” Ah = 13.35 cm2) immersed in the particles is used to provide heat to the
surrounding bed. A variac (E1) is used to regulate heater power. Heater, bed and inlet air
temperatures are measured by thermocouples (T1, T2 and T3, respectively).
4.2. Experimental procedure
4.2.1. Fluidization study
1) Supply power by turning the red dial on the left-hand side of the experimental unit.
2) Verify that the glass cylinder is filled with α-Al2O3 particles to a bed height of
approximately 9 cm.
3) Verify that the air regulator (located behind and above the experimental unit) is adjusted
to a delivery pressure of approximately 6 bar.
4) Adjust the inlet pressure (P3) to 1 bar by adjust pressure regulator V2.

Figure 4. Schematic of experimental fluidized bed apparatus [1].
5) Using the flow regulating valve V1, adjust the air flowrate to the minimum reference
value of 8 L/min (labeled “Ref” on the rotameter). Read the rotameter using the bottom
of the float as the indicator.
6) Once the fluid bed pressure reading (P1) is stable, record the pressure, flowrate and bed
height.
7) Increase the flowrate to 9 L/min by adjusting V1, then adjust inlet pressure P3 to 1 bar
using V2 if necessary. Once the fluid bed pressure reading (P1) is stable, record the
pressure, flowrate and bed height.
8) Continue the procedure of increasing flowrate in small (~1 L/min) steps while recording
pressure, flowrate and bed height and observing the bed. After each adjustment, be sure
to adjust inlet pressure P3 to 1 bar using pressure regulator V2.
9) As soon as particles on the surface of the bed begin to move (i.e., a bubble escapes or a
crack is visible in the bed), monitor the pressure P1. If the pressure stays constant or
begins to fall, it is likely that the bed loosening velocity (uloose) has been reached. Record
the bed loosening velocity observed during testing. Note: uloose is defined as the velocity
at which particles begin to fluidize, and is a rough estimation of umf based solely on
visual observations of particle behavior within the bed while increasing the air flowrate.
10) Continue the procedure of increasing flowrate in small (~1 L/min) steps while recording
pressure, flowrate and bed height until a flowrate of 20 L/min is reached. If any of these
values “jump” continuously (they likely will), record a mean value. Observe the bed
behavior, taking note of the various fluidization regimes achieved during testing.
11) Once 20 L/min is reached, continue increasing flowrate in steps, but increase the step size
to 5 L/min (e.g. 20 L/min, 25 L/min, 30 L/min, etc.). Record pressure, flowrate and bed

height until a flowrate of 70 L/min is reached. Observe the bed behavior, taking note of
the various fluidization regimes achieved during testing.
12) Next, begin reducing the flowrate in the same steps (e.g. go from 70 to 20 L/min in 5
L/min steps, then from 20 to 8 L/min in 1 L/min steps) while recording pressure, flowrate
and bed height once each reading has stabilized.
4.2.2. Heat transfer study
1) Verify that the black mark on the heating rod is at a height of approximately 18 cm.
2) Adjust air flowrate to 70 L/min using V1 and heater power to 30 W using the variac (E1).
3) Allow for temperatures to stabilize before recording heater temperature (T1) and fluid
bed temperature (T2); this will likely take 3-5 minutes.
4) Decrease the air flowrate to 65 L/min using V1, adjusting pressure regulator V2 to keep
inlet pressure P3 at a constant value of 1 bar. Maintain heater power at 30 W by adjusting
variac E1. Allow for temperatures to stabilize before recording heater temperature (T1)
and fluid bed temperature (T2).
5) Repeat Step 4 for air flowrates of 60, 55, 50, 45, 40, 35, 30, 25 and 20 L/min, allowing
ample time for steady state to be reached before recording heater temperature (T1) and
fluid bed temperature (T2). Note: As the air flowrate is decreased, the heater temperature
will increase. The heater is equipped with a governor that will temporarily cut off power
to the heater if the heater temperature exceeds ~85-90℃. As a result, it is not possible to
test air flowrates below 20 L/min during the heat transfer study.
5. Data Analysis
Calculate theoretical ut and umf values for the tested α-Al2O3 particle. Produce a fluidization
curve showing empirical ΔP and bed height on y-axes and superficial gas velocities on the xaxis. Determine an experimental umf value. Are the theoretical and empirical umf values similar?
How does umf compare with uloose? Why does the fluidization curve look different depending on
whether superficial gas velocities were raised from low to high values or lowered from high to
low values during testing?
Identify each of the fluidization regimes achieved by the bed during testing. Specify the range of
superficial gas velocities at which each regime exists as a multiple of umf (e.g. “the bubbling
regime exists at superficial gas velocities between 5 and 7 times umf”).
Hypothesize the Geldart group of the tested α-Al2O3 powder. What experimental observations
and material specifications lead you to this hypothesis?
Determine the empirical heat transfer coefficients for the bed as a function of u0. How do
different fluidization conditions affect heat transfer within the bed?
References
1. Seoul National University Multiphase and Multiphase Flow LAB, “Multiphase Flow,” at
http://mffv.snu.ac.kr/research_multiphase.html, last accessed January 8, 2018.
2. FM 302 Course Notes, located at http://www.che.iitb.ac.in/courses/uglab/cl333n335/
fm302-fluidisation.pdf, last accessed August 11, 2011.

3. Gunt Hamburg, Installation Literature, Heat Transfer System – Fluid Bed and
Fluidization, (2009).
4. Yates, J. G. Fundamentals of fluidized-bed Chemical Processes, Butterworths, London,
1983.

