CHE 225 – Introduction to Chemical Engineering Analysis

Spring 2023

STUDY GUIDE FOR THE FINAL EXAM
Instructions: The final exam will be closed book/closed notes covering all topics from the entire
semester. The test will last 2.5 hours.
While the exam is closed notes, you can bring two “torpedo” sheets from the previous 2 tests and a
new torpedo for this final exam with any information of your choosing (8.5” x 11”, you can use both
sides). The torpedoes must be created by you. At the end of the exam, staple your torpedo sheets to
the back of the exam.
Review the two previous study guides as well as your exams. In addition to these, you should be
prepared to address the following:
•

Deriving differential equations for transient reactive systems. Apply molar balances
to derive the differential equations for a closed or open system in which chemical reactions
take place. Identify initial conditions. One reaction may take place or multiple reactions may
take place concurrently. Be able to use the given order of chemical reaction information to
calculate the generation (G) and consumption (C) terms in the general material balance.
Example: A continuously stirred tank reactor (CSTR) is filled with 10 L of a 1 M solution of
species A. Liquid continuously enters and exits the tank at a constant flow rates of 𝑣!̇
and 𝑣̇ , respectively. Starting at t=0, species A decomposes into species B and species C
according to the following reactions and reaction rates:
2A ® B,
rA,1 = -2*k1*CA2
A ® C,
rA,2 = -k2*CA
In the above equations, rA,i is rate of generation of A in reaction i. Assume that all species
are in the liquid state, and the density of the liquid ρ remains constant. Use initial conditions
to generate the set of differential equations describing how the concentration of each species
changes with time. Show your work.

•

Numerical solution of differential equations. Apply numerical methods (e.g., Euler,
Predictor-Corrector, and 2nd order or 4th order Runge-Kutta methods) discussed in class to
solve individual or coupled differential equations numerically.
Example: Write the equations for Ci+1, k1, and k2 if you use the 2nd order Runge-Kutta method
to numerically solve the following coupled differential equations:
• dCA/dt = …
• dCB/dt = …
Note: always using corresponding k for updating the matched variables (e.g., use CA’s k1
and k2 to update CA, and CB’s k1 and k2 to update CB)

•

Numerical integration and differentiation. Given a set of data, perform numerical
integration using the rectangular rule, trapezoidal rule, Romberg integration, and Simpson’s
1/3 and 3/8 rule. For the same data, perform numerical differentiation using the forward,
backward, and central methods. Graphically illustrate each rule or method.

Example: Apply the Romberg rule to integrate across the following data set representing
the concentration of species A over time:
t (min)
CA (mM)
0
100
1
70
2
35
3
50
4
65
•

Excel VBA. We will not ask you to write a VBA code without using a computer. However,
we may give you a simple code and ask to interpret what is does, fill in blank lines, identify
bugs and provide corrections. Know what is a macro and VBA, and how to record a macro.
Be able to perform the following in VBA:
• Define a new variable with correct data format (single, double, integer,
string, etc.)
• Read variable values from textbox or spreadsheet
• Output results to textbox or spreadsheet
• If/Else and If/Elseif statement
• Select Case statement
• For loop
• Do loop
• Use GoTo command to exit For loop
• Use Exit Do command to exit Do loop

•

Matlab. Basic syntax for creating .m files (script and function files). Define a new function
or multiple functions at the same time. Call a function in a script. Create and manipulate
matrices in Matlab. Use Matlab to solve series of linear equations. Use the fzero and fsolve
functions to solve individual or multiple nonlinear equations. Use the ode45 function to
numerically solve individual and coupled ordinary differential equations.
Example: What is the objective of entering fsolve(@example1, [0 0]) on the command line,
where example1.m has the following code:
function y = example1(x)
y = [x(1) – x(2) – 2; x(1) + x(2) – 4];
end

•

Do not forget to review the earlier content and examples covered in class (e.g., steady state
CSTR with multiple reactions, transient CSTR with multiple reactions, tanks of different shapes
being filled, and so on, going back through the semester).

•

Do not forget to review all homework assignments and midterm tests.

