OMB CONTROL NO. 1405-0002
EXPIRATION DATE: 10/31/2025
ESTIMATED BURDEN: 2 HOURS

U.S. Department of State
Instructions for Preparing and Submitting a
DS-2032: Statement of Registration
General Notes
A.

ITAR refers to the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (22 CFR Parts 120-130).

B.

Entities with shared ownership or control (e.g., subsidiaries and affiliates) generally may not register
separately.

C. For purposes of completing the DS-2032, “foreign person” is defined in the ITAR.
D. For purposes of completing the DS-2032, “U.S. person” is defined in the ITAR.
E.

Foreign telephone numbers listed on the application must include the full international dialing code
(including country and city code, if applicable).

F.

All relevant documentation must be provided with the DS-2032 at the time of submission.

G. All supporting documentation must be uploaded in Block 11.
H. Only electronic payment of registration fees will be accepted.
I.

Changes in certain information contained in this application must be reported promptly in
accordance with the ITAR.

J.

For assistance in completing the DS-2032, contact the DDTC Response Team at 202-663-1282 or
by email at DDTCResponseTeam@state.gov.

1. General Information
Provide the following general information.
Indicate whether the applicant meets the definition of a “U.S. Person.”

Applicant is a U.S.
Person
2. Registration Information

Provide the following information about the registration.
Registration
Action

Specify the registration action being taken.
New

Select when registering for a new registration where the applicant
doesn’t have an existing registration with DDTC.

Renew

Select when renewing an existing registration or when adding a new
registration type during renewal (e.g., adding Broker to an existing
Manufacturer registration).

Amend

Select when making changes or adding a new registration type to a
registration that is not due for renewal. All applicable changes must
be provided on the form. Required supporting documentation,
provided in Block 11, must be updated if affected by the changes.

Last Updated: May 1, 2025
DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 1 of 15

Cancel

Select when notifying DDTC that the registrant intends to let the
registration expire at the end of the registration period.
When cancelling a registration, the registrant must specify the
applicable Registration Code being canceled and indicate which
activities are ending within the Registration Cancellation Statement.

Registration
Code

If the Registration Action is “Renew,” “Amend” or “Cancel,” enter the registrant’s
applicable registration code (e.g., M11111 or K-1111). If the registrant has two
registration codes affected by the renewal, amendment, or cancellation, select Add to
enter the additional code.

Registration
Type

Specify the type of registration being applied for, renewed, or amended. More than
one may be specified.
Manufacturer

Select if engaged within the United States in the business of
manufacturing defense articles. Manufacturers who do not engage
in exporting must nevertheless register. This option is only available
if Applicant is a U.S. Person is “Yes.”

Exporter

Select if engaged within the United States in the business of
exporting or temporarily importing defense articles or furnishing
defense services. This option is only available if Applicant is a U.S.
Person is “Yes.”

Broker

Select if engaged in brokering activities as identified in the ITAR
unless exempt from registration. Registration is generally a
precondition for the issuance of approval for brokering activities or
the use of exemptions. Brokers may not obtain export licenses. To
obtain an export license, a U.S. broker must also be registered as an
exporter.

FMS Freight
Forwarder
(Exporter)

Select if engaged as a U.S. freight forwarder under the Foreign
Military Sales (FMS) program. This option is only available if
Applicant is a U.S. Person is “Yes.”

One Time
Exemption

Select if not in the business of manufacturing, exporting, temporarily
importing, brokering and/or furnishing defense articles and defense
services and requesting an exemption from the requirement to pay
registration fees for the purpose of carrying out a single transaction
requiring registration under the ITAR. This option is only available if
Applicant is a U.S. Person is “Yes.”
An explanation in the form of a completed license along with a letter
certifying the applicant is not in the business of manufacturing,
exporting, temporarily importing, brokering and/or furnishing defense
articles/defense services must be attached in Block 11 to describe
the transaction and justify the exemption.

U.S.
Government

DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

Select if a senior official (acting in an official government agency
capacity) needs to apply for export licenses or use established
license exemptions. This option is only available if Applicant is a U.S.
Person is “Yes.”

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 2 of 15

Foreign
Government

Select if a senior official (acting in an official foreign embassy
capacity) needs to allow a foreign embassy in the U.S. the the ability
to apply for export licenses, use established license exemptions,
and/or designate an FMS Freight Forwarder(Exporter).

Authorized
Countries

If Registration Type is “FMS Freight Forwarder (Exporter),” enter the country
authorized to support as a U.S. registrant, listed subsidiary, and/or listed affiliate. If an
authorization is cancelled or otherwise lapses, FMS freight forwarders must update
the registration to reflect the change. If the FMS Freight Forwarder (Exporter) has
more than one authorized countries, select Add to enter the additional countries.

Designate an
FMS Freight
Forwarder

If Registration Type is “Foreign Government,” check the box in order to designate an
FMS freight forwarder. Select Add to designate additional FMS freight forwarders.

FMS Freight
Forwarder

If Designate an FMS Freight Forwarder is checked, enter the legal name of the
registered U.S. freight forwarder.

Each applicable embassy must designate a registered U.S. FMS Freight Forwarder
(Exporter) for their FMS transactions. FMS Freight Forwarder (Exporter) registrations
will be returned or held pending receipt of a designation from each identified country.
Likewise, designations received prior to registration will be returned or held pending
receipt of a related application.

If the designated U.S. freight forwarder is not the U.S. registrant, but rather a
subsidiary or affiliate listed in the registration, then the embassy must specify both the
designated U.S. freight forwarder and the U.S. registrant's legal name.
If known, enter the FMS freight forwarder’s registration code and contract duration.
Provide a point of contact (first name, last name, telephone number, and email
address) for the FMS freight forwarder.
Registration
Cancellation
Statement

If Registration Action is “Cancel,” select the applicable business activities that the
applicant will no longer be involved in at the end of the current registration period.
More than one may be selected.

Did you conduct
any ITAR
business during
the lapse?

If Registration Action is “Renew” and the registration has lapsed, indicate whether any
ITAR controlled business activities were conducted during the lapse in registration.

Lapsed
Registration
ITAR Activity
Dates

If Did you conduct any ITAR business during the lapse is “Yes,” enter the start and
end dates of ITAR controlled business activities the applicant engaged in during the
lapsed period. To report additional dates of ITAR controlled business activities that
occurred during the lapse, select Add.
If the registration has lapsed by more than one month following the expiration date of
the registration, the applicant must pay a lapsed registration fee. The lapse fee
consists of the Tier 1 annual renewal fee for each 12 month period in which any ITAR
controlled business activity occurred during the lapse up to a maximum of 5 years.
Also, if the renewal is submitted within a year of expiration, DDTC uses the monthlyprorated amount ($250) of the Tier 1 annual flat fee to calculate the total lapse fee.
Upon submission of the registration renewal, the system will automatically calculate
the lapse fee due based on the start and end dates provided and combine them with
the renewal fee due. Refer to the DDTC website for more information regarding
registration fees and the calculation of lapse registration fees.

DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 3 of 15

Has a voluntary
disclosure been
submitted
regarding the
conduct of ITAR
business during
the lapse?

If Did you conduct any ITAR business during the lapse is “Yes,” indicate whether a
voluntary disclosure has been submitted for the ITAR controlled activities that
occurred during the lapse. Refer to the ITAR for guidance regarding the submission of
voluntary disclosures.

Does the
applicant have
brokering
activity to
report?

If Registration Action is “Renew” and Registration Type is “Broker,” indicate whether
brokering activity, both successful and unsuccessful, occurred during the
concluding registration period.
If “Yes,” complete the brokering report with the information specified in the ITAR and
attach in Block 11. The brokering report should cover all brokers identified on the DS2032.
A “No” response satisfies the ITAR certification requirement of reporting that there
were no brokering activities.

Does the
amendment
involve a
material change
to the
registration?

If Registration Action is “Amend,” indicate whether the amendment to the registration
involves a material change to the registration requiring formal notification to DDTC.
Refer to the ITAR for guidance regarding changes to information furnished by
registrants.

Material Change If Does the amendment involve a material change to the registration is “Yes,” indicate
Type
which types of material changes are being made to the registration. More than one
may be specified.
Merger or
Acquisition or
Divestiture
(MAD)
Criminal
Charge

DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

Select if the material change involves a Merger or Acquisition or
Divestiture,see the guidance on DDTC’s website for submitting
Merger/Acquisition/Divestiture notifications.
Select if the material change involves a change to the
Indicted/Charged/Convicted Status in Block 11 or the
Indicted/Charged/Convicted Status of one or more directors, senior
officers, partners, and/or owners listed in Block 6.

Eligibility

Select if the material change involves a change to the Contract and
License Eligibility Status in Block 11.

Name

Select if the material change involves a change to the registrant’s
name.

Address

Select if the material change involves a change to the registrant’s
address.

Legal
Organization
Structure

Select if the material change involves a change to the registrant’s
legal organization structure or type (e.g., Corporation to Limited
Liability Company) to include name and address changes of
parents, subsidiaries, and affiliates.

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 4 of 15

Directors,
Senior Officers,
Partners,
and/or Owners

Select if the material change involves the addition or removal of as
well as changes to the first name, last name, citizenship, U.S.
person status, country of residence, company/organization name,
doing business as name, and/or organization address changes for
directors, senior officers, partners, and/or owners listed in Block 6.

Establishment/
Addition of
Subsidiary/
Controlled
Affiliate

Select if the material change involves the establishment and/or
addition, of an existing U.S. or foreign subsidiary or controlled
affiliate who will engage in manufacturing defense articles,
exporting, and/or brokering defense articles/defense services.

Notification
If Does the amendment involve a material change to the registration is “Yes,” enter
Triggering Event the date of the event that triggered the required notification.
Date
Transaction
Summary

If Does the amendment involve a material change to the registration is “Yes,” enter a
summary of transaction, including a statement of purpose and description of scope
with an explanation of actions taken/to be taken inside and outside the U.S..

3. Foreign Ownership/Control Information
Provide the following information about foreign ownership/control of the applicant/registrant. This block
will not appear when Registration Type is “U.S. Government” or “Foreign Government.”
> 50% Foreign
Person
Ownership

Indicate whether a foreign person owns, or foreign persons own, more than 50% of
the outstanding voting securities or equity of the applicant.

Foreign Person
Control

Indicate whether a foreign person has, or foreign persons have, the authority and/or
the ability to establish or direct the general policies or day-to-day operations of the
applicant.

25% Foreign
Person
Ownership/
Control

Indicate whether a foreign person owns, or foreign persons own, 25% or more of the
outstanding voting securities or equity and no other person controls an equal or
larger percentage. If “Yes,” the applicant may address the presumption of foreign
control by providing an explanation of applicant control/ownership in Block 11.

126.1 Foreign
Person Control

Indicate whether a foreign person (including foreign governments) from countries
specified in 22 CFR 126.1 have the authority and/or ability to establish and/or direct
the general policies

126.1 Foreign
Person
Ownership

Indicate whether a foreign person (including foreign governments) from countries
specified in 22 CFR 126.1 own more than 5% of the outstanding voting securities or
equity of the applicant.

4. Organization Type Information
Provide the following information about the type of organization. This block will not appear when
Registration Type is “U.S. Government” or “Foreign Government.”

DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 5 of 15

Organization
Type

Select the applicant’s organization type.
Corporation

Select when the applicant is a corporation.

Limited
Liability
Company

Select when the applicant is a limited liability company.

Partnership

Select when the applicant is a partnership.

Sole
Proprietorship

Select when the applicant is a sole proprietorship.

Educational
Institution

Select when the applicant is a university, college, vocational school
or other post secondary educational institution.

Nonprofit

Select when the applicant is a nonprofit. Applicants who are wholly
exempt from income taxation pursuant to 26 U.S.C 501(c)(3) must
provide proof of such status (e.g., IRS Certification Form) in Block 11
to qualify for a reduced registration fee. The IRS certification must
apply to all entities/subsidiaries/affiliates listed on the registration
submission.

Individual

Select when the applicant is a natural person applying in his or her
personal capacity. If the applicant is an individual applying on behalf
of another legal entity or sole proprietorship, “Individual” should not
be selected.

Other

Select if none of the other organization types apply. An explanation
of the organizational structure must be included in Block 11.

Date of
If applicable, enter the date of incorporation or business commencement.
Incorporation or
Business
Commencement
Place of
If applicable, enter the city, country, and state/province for the place of incorporation
Incorporation or or business commencement.
Business
Commencement
The applicant
has only a
foreign parent
(or foreign
parents) and
intends to list at
least one
affiliate.

DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

Indicate whether the applicant has only a foreign parent (or foreign parents) and
intends to list at least one affiliate.
Applicants with affiliates, but without a U.S. parent (e.g., foreign ownership of several
affiliated U.S. entities), must provide in Block 11, a written designation by the foreign
parent indicating that the applicant will be the primary affiliate for the purposes of
registration with DDTC and will therefore exercise control over the consolidated
registration of affiliates.

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 6 of 15

5. Identifying Information
Provide the following identifying information regarding the applicant. Note that the highest U.S. parent
(ultimate or internmediate) engaged in ITAR controlled activities in a corporate family must be the
applicant. If the applicant indicates that a U.S. parent in Block 9 is engaged in ITAR activities, the
registration may be rejected.
Applicant Type

Indicate whether the applicant is applying as a natural person or an entity. If the
submitter is acting in his or her personal capacity, select “Natural Person.” If the
submission is being made on behalf of a corporation, business association,
partnership, society, trust, or any other entity, organization or group, including
governmental entities; select “Entity.”

Applicant Legal
Name

If Applicant Type is “Natural Person,” enter the legal first, middle, and last name of the
applicant. If the applicant does not have a legal middle name, check “None.”

Company/
Organization
Legal Name

If Applicant Type is “Entity,” enter the legal name of the corporation, business
association, partnership, society, trust, or any other entity, organization or group,
including governmental entities. This must be the legal name of the entity and not the
doing business as name.
New and renewing applicants must include documentation in Block 11, issued or
endorsed by the relevant government authority authorizing the applicant to engage in
business. For U.S. applicants, the documentation must be at the State government
level and can include articles of incorporation, articles of organization, partnership
agreements, or a certificate of good standing. The legal name provided in the
documentation must match the legal name entered here.
By providing government issued or endorsed documentation, the applicant makes
representation they are in good standing with the subject government authority. If the
applicant is not in good standing, an explanation must be included with the
documentation in Block 11.

Doing Business
As

If Applicant Type is “Entity” and the entity does business under a name that is
different from the legal name, enter the doing business as name. If the entity has
multiple doing business as name, select Add to provide the additional names.

Applicant’s
Legal Address

Enter the applicant’s primary physical legal address in the space provided.

Website

If applicable, enter the web address of the applicant’s website.

Mailing address
is the same as
the legal
address

Check the box if the applicant’s mailing address is the same as the primary physical
legal address. If the mailing address is different from the primary physical legal
address, enter the mailing address in the space provided.

Point of Contact

Provide a point of contact for the registration. The point of contact designated by the
applicant is the individual to whom all registration correspondence will be sent (e.g.,
the empowered official, or other individual, responsible for registration and
compliance). If the applicant chooses to provide additional points of contact it wishes
to receive DDTC correspondence related to the registration, select Add.
Point of
Contact Type

DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

Indicate whether the applicant’s point of contact for the registration is
the applicant or a third party. If the point of contact for the registration

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 7 of 15

is a third party authorized to discuss the disclosure on behalf of the
submitter (e.g., outside counsel), select “Third Party.” Otherwise,
select “Applicant.”
By providing an optional third party point of contact, the applicant: (1)
represents that the designated representative is empowered to
represent the applicant with regard to registration-related issues, and
(2) authorizes DDTC to contact the designated representative
regarding registration issues and, as necessary, provide and discuss
registration and other related information.
Company/
Organization
Name

If Point of Contact Type is “Third Party,” enter the name of the third
party point of contact’s company/organization.

First Name

Enter the first name of the point of contact.

Last Name

Enter the last name of the point of contact.

Position/Title

Enter the point of contact’s position or title.

Telephone

Enter the primary telephone number where the point of contact can
be reached.

Email

Enter an email address where the point of contact can be reached.

6. Members of the Board of Directors, Senior Officers, Partners and Owners
Complete this block for each member of the board of directors, senior officer, partner or owner. All owners
of more than 5% of the applicant’s voting securities and all senior officers (e.g., chief executive offier,
president, secretary, partner, member, treasurer, chief financial officer, chief operating officer, general
counsel) must be listed. Applicants selecting “Individual” for Organization Type in Block 4 should also
complete this section. Do not provide the information in a separate attachment. Select Add to provide
additional directors, officers, partners, or owners.
Member Type

Indicate whether the board member, officer, partner or owner is a natural person or
entity.

U.S. Person

Indicate whether the board member, officer, partner or owner is a U.S. person.

Position/Title

Enter the board member, officer, partner or owner’s position or title. The position or
title must indicate the relationship to the applicant (e.g., “Board Member”).

Member Name

If Member Type is “Natural Person,” enter the legal first, middle, and last name of the
board member, officer, partner or owner. If the member does not have a legal middle
name, check “None.”

Citizenship

If Member Type is “Natural Person,” indicate the board member, officer, partner or
owner’s country of citizenship. If the individual has multiple citizenships, select Add
and enter the additional citizenships in the space provided.
For senior officer, director and individual owners, if citizenship is foreign and U.S
Person is “Yes,” include a copy of a valid U.S. government issued permanent resident
card or other lawful permanent residence document for documentation of U.S. person

DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 8 of 15

status in Block 11.
Date of Birth

If Member Type is “Natural Person,” enter the board member, officer, partner or
owner’s date of birth.

Birth Country

If Member Type is “Natural Person,” indicate the board member, officer, partner or
owner’s birth country.

Country of
Residence

If Member Type is “Natural Person,” indicate the board member, officer, partner or
owner’s country of residence.

Telephone

If Member Type is “Natural Person,” enter the primary telephone number where the
board member, officer, partner or owner can be reached.

Email

If Member Type is “Natural Person,” enter the primary email address where the board
member, officer, partner or owner can be reached.

Company/
Organization
Name

If Member Type is “Entity,” enter the legal name of the partner or owner.

Doing Business
As Name

If Member Type is “Entity,” enter the name the partner or owner does business as.

Address

If Member Type is “Entity,” enter the primary physical legal address of the partner or
owner.

Point of Contact
Name

If Member Type is “Entity,” enter the first and last name of a point of contact for the
entity.

Point of Contact
Telephone

If Member Type is “Entity,” enter the primary telephone number for the point of contact
at the entity.

Point of Contact
Email

If Member Type is “Entity,” enter the primary email address for the point of contact at
the entity.

Indicted/
Otherwise
Charged/
Convicted

Indicate whether the board member, officer, parter or owner has been indicated or
otherwise charged (e.g., charged by criminal information in lieu of indictment) for or
convicted of violating any of the U.S. criminal statutes enumerated in 22 CFR 120.6 or
violating a foreign criminal law on exportation of defense articles where convicted of
such violation carries a minimum term of imprisonment of greater than 1 year.

7. U.S. Munitions List Categories
Provide the following information related to the U.S. Munitions List (USML) categories relevant to the
applicant’s manufacturing, exporting and/or brokering activities. This block will not appear when
Registration Type is “U.S. Government” or “Foreign Government.”
USML Category

DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

Indicate the applicable USML categories. Only select Category XXI if the applicant
has relavant Commodity Jurisdiction (CJ) determinations issue by DDTC indicating
the item is covered under Category XXI.

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 9 of 15

Applicable
Commodity
Jurisdication
Number

If USML Category is “XXI,” indicate the applicable CJ number related to the Category
XXI determination. To provide additional CJ numbers related to Category XXI
determinations, select Add.

8. Affiliate/Subsidiary Information
Provide the following affiliate and/or subsidiary information. This block will not appear when Registration
Type is “U.S. Government” or “Foreign Government.”
Affiliate/
Subsidiary
Ownership/
Control

Indicate whether the applicant owns, or otherwise controls, any U.S. or foreign
affiliates or subsidiaries in the business of manufacturing, exporting and/or brokering
defense articles or services.

Affiliate/
Subsidiary

If Affiliate/Subsidiary Ownership/Control is “Yes,” provide the following information for
each affiliate or subsidiary controlled by the applicant that is involved in the
manufacture, export, and/or brokering of defense articles and services. If the applicant
is only applying for a broker registration, only those affiliates or subsidiaries that are
involved in brokering should be listed. Each relevant subsidiary should be listed once.
It is not necessary to list multiple locations for each. Do not provide the information in
a separate attachment. To include additional affiliates or subsidiaries, select Add.

DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

Activity Type

Indicate which activities the affiliate or subsidiary is involved in.

Company/
Organization
Legal Name

Enter the legal company or organization name of the affiliate or
subsidiary.

Doing
Business As
Name

Enter the name the affiliate or subsidiary does business under.

Legal Address

Enter the primary physical legal address of the affiliate or subsidiary.

U.S. Person

Indicate whether the affiliate or subsidiary meets the ITAR definition
of a U.S. person.

Relationship

Indicate whether the entity is an affiliate or subsidiary of the
applicant.

Applicant
Control

If Relationship is “Affiliate,” indicate whether the applicant has
authority and/or ability to establish the or direct the general policies
or day-to-day operations of the affiliate.

25% Applicant
Ownership

If Relationship is “Affiliate,” indicate whether the applicant owns 25%
or more of the affiliate’s outstanding voting securities or equity and
no other person controls and equal or larger percentage.

126.1 Foreign
Person
Control

If Relationship is “Affiliate,” indicate whether a foreign person from a
country specified in 22 CFR 126.1 has, or foreign persons from 22
CFR 126.1 countries have, the authority and/or ability to establish
and/or direct the general policies and/or day-today operations of the

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 10 of 15

affiliate.
126.1 Foreign
Person
Ownership

If Relationship is “Affiliate,” indicate whether a foreign person from a
country specified in 22 CFR 126.1 controls, or foreign persons from
22 CFR 126.1 countries control, more than 5% of the affiliate’s voting
securities.

Separate Point
of Contact for
Affiliate/
Subsidiary

Check the box if the applicant wishes to provide a separate point of
contact for the affiliate or subsidiary. If the affiliate or subsidiary will
have a separate point of contact from the applicant, enter the point of
contact’s first name, last name, title, primary telephone number and
primary email address.

Affiliate/
Subsidiary
Brokering
Activity Report

If Registration Action is “Renew” and Activity Type is “Broker,”
indicate whether the affiliate or subsidiary has brokering activity to
report (including successful/unsuccessful brokering activity).

Reason for
Adding or
Removing
Affiliate/
Subsidiary

If Registration Action is “Renew” or “Amend” and an
affiliate/subsidiary is being added or removed, select the reason
For Add/Remove:
1. Merger – a consolidation of two (or more) existing companies,
including at least one DDTC registrant.
2. Acquisition – acquisition of a DDTC registrant, or a
registered subsidiary or affiliate thereof.
3. Divestiture – disposal of company registered with DDTC, or a
registered subsidiary or affiliate thereof.
4. Establishment/Addition (non-MAD) - new/existing
subsidiary or affiliate.
5. Remove/Not Dispose –affiliate/subsidiary thereof no longer
in ITAR business and entity not disposed.
6. Other – applicant must include an explanation for the addition
or removal in Block 11.
If reason selected for adding or removing affiliate/subsidiary is
Merger, Acquisition, or Divestiture, did you submit, as appropriate,
60 day pre-notification / 5 day MAD material change notifications?

9. Parent Information
Provide the following parent information. This block will not appear when Registration Type is “U.S.
Government” or “Foreign Government.”
Does the
applicant have
any parent
entities?

DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

Indicate whether the applicant has any parent entities (U.S. and foreign, intermediate
and ultimate).

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 11 of 15

Parent Entity

If Does the applicant have any parent entities is “Yes,” provide the following
information for each parent entity. All parent entities should be listed. The ultimate
parent should be listed first, with any intermediate parents following. Only one ultimate
parent should be listed. The order of parents listed should match the order reflected in
the applicant’s organizational chart. Do not provide the following information in an
attachment. To provide additional parent entities, select Add.
Company/
Organization
Legal Name

Enter the legal company or organization name of the parent entity.

Doing
Business As
Name

Enter the name the parent entity does business under.

Legal Address

Enter the primary physical legal address of the parent entity.

Separate Point Check the box if the applicant wishes to provide a separate point of
of Contact for
contact for the parent entity. If the parent entity will have a separate
Parent
point of contact from the applicant, enter the point of contact’s first
name, last name, title, primary telephone number and primary email
address.
Parent Status

Indicate whether the applicant’s parent entity is the ultimate or
intermediate parent.

U.S. Person

Indicate whether the parent entity meets the ITAR definition of a U.S.
person.

Foreign
Owned/
Controlled

Indicate whether the parent entity is foreign owned or controlled.

Government
Owned/
Controlled

Indicate whether the parent entity is government owned or
controlled.

10. ITAR Written Policies
Indicate whether the applicant has written policies and procedures for compliance with the ITAR
(including but not limited to 22 CFR 122.5). This block will not appear when Registration Type is “U.S.
Government” or “Foreign Government.”
11. Statement of Registration
Certification Statements
The senior officer signing the registration application on behalf of the applicant warrants the truth of all
statements made on the form together with any and all appendices and attachments.
In addition, the senior officer must affirm the status of the applicant, certain corporate family members,
and officers with respect to certain criminal indictments and/or convictions and contract and/or license
eligibility by selecting the appropriate options under Indicted/Charged/Convicted Status and Contract and
License Eligibility. The General Services Administration’s System for Award Management
DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 12 of 15

(https://www.sam.gov) and the Consolidated Screening List (https://www.export.gov/csl-search) are
valuable resources regarding the indicttment and/or conviction status and contract and/or license
eligibility status of named parties. These sites, while helpful, are not all-inclusive and additional screening
and/or research may be required.
For each person or entity that has been indicted or otherwise charged, or is ineligible to contract with
and/or to receive a license from the U.S. government, the applicant must include an explantion in Block
11 with relevant documentation. Relevant documentation includes (but is not limited to) indictments,
reinstatement letters, and government eligibility notices. Documents uploaded per Block 6 do not need to
be uploaded more than once.
Supporting Documentation
To include relevant documentation with the submission, select the file to be included and indicate the
Document Type. Click Upload and repeat for each relevant document to be included with the
submission. Do not combine multiple requested documents into a single attachment. Supporting
documentation that is not in English must be accompanied by a complete translation. The document
types are described below:
Organizational Chart

An organizational chart showing all layers of the organization, through the
ultimate parent (U.S. or foreign) identified in Block 9 as well as affiliates or
subsidiaries identified in Block 8. An organizational chart is not required if
the applicant does not include any parents, affiliates, and/or subsidiaries.

Applicant Organization
An explanation of the applicant’s organization type if the organization type
Type “Other” Explanation is not a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, sole
proprietorship, educational institution, nonprofit, or individual. Required if
Organization Type in Block 4 is “Other.”
Foreign Parent
Designation

A written designation provided by the foreign parent indicating that the
applicant will be the primary affiliate for the purposes of registration with
DDTC and will therefore exercise control over the consolidated registration
of affiliates. A foreign parent designation is required if the applicant has only
a foreign parent and lists one or more affiliates.

Indicted/Charged/
Convicted Status
Documentation

Documentation including (but not limited to) indictments, reinstatement
letters, and government eligibility notices. Required for each person or
entity listed in the application that has been indicted, otherwise charged, or
convicted. This information is required under blocks 6 and 11. Note that the
Block 11 requirement is more expansive than Block 6. Documentation
applying to both blocks 6 and 11 only need to be uploaded once.

Explanation of Applicant
Control/Ownership

An explanation by the applicant addressing the resulting presumption of
foreign control related to a foreign person or foreign persons owning 25% or
more of the outstanding voting securities and no other person controls an
equal or larger percentage.

Contract and License
Eligibility Status
Documentation

Documentation such as a copy of the System for Awards Management
database entry and/or documentation regarding the period of ineligibility.
Documentation is required for each person or entity listed on the application
that is ineligible to contract with, or to receive a license or other approval to
import defense articles or defense services from, or to receive an export
license or other approval from, any agency of the U.S. government.

DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 13 of 15

IRS Nonprofit
Authorization

Supporting documentation of the applicant’s wholly exempt from income
taxation pursuant to 26 U.S.C 501(c)(3) status (e.g., IRS Certification
Form). Required if the Organization Type in Block 4 is “Nonprofit.” The IRS
certification must apply to all entities/subsidiaries/affiliates listed on the
registration submission.

Proof Applicant is
Currently Authorized to
do Business

Documentation issued or endorsed by a government authority showing the
applicant is authorized to do business in the U.S or in a foreign country.
Required for all applicants, except those where Organization Type in Block
4 is “Individual.”

Documentation of
Individual U.S. Person
Status

A valid U.S. government issued permanent resident card or other lawful
permanent residence document. Required for each senior officer, director,
and individual owner listed in Block 6 if their citizenship is non-U.S. and
they are a U.S. person.

Subsidiary/Affiliate
Add/Remove Type
“Other” Explanation

An explanation for the addition or removal of an affiliate or subsidiary from
the application. Required if an affiliate or subsidiary was added or removed
from the application when renewing or amending the registration and
Reason for Adding or Removing Affiliate/Subsidiary is “Other.”

One Time Exemption
Certification Letter

A certification letter provided by the applicant indicating that the applicant is
not in the business of manufacturing, exporting, temporarily importing,
brokering or furnishing defense articles or services and is requesting a one
time exemption from the requirement to pay registration fees. Required if
Registration Type in Block 2 is “One Time Exemption.”

License Application for
One Time Exemption

A copy of the submitted application for a license to export or temporarily
import defense articles describing the details of the transaction. Required if
Registration Type in Block 2 is “One Time Exemption.”

Broker Activity Report

A report indicating whether brokering activity occurred, whether successful
or not, during the concluding registration period. The report is required if
renewing a broker registration and must be provided for the applicant and
for each affiliate or subsidiary involved in brokering.

Other Supporting
Documenation

Other supporting documentation related to the registration that the applicant
believes is relevant to its application.

Senior Officer Details and Signature
The application must be signed by a senior officer (e.g., chief executive officer, president, comptroller,
treasurer, general counsel) empowered by the applicant. The senior officer must be listed in Block 6 and
be a U.S. person, unless the applicant is registering as a foreign broker or government.
Once the application is signed by the designated senior official, registration fees can be payed. Only
electronic payment through pay.gov will be accepted. The current registration fee structure can be viewed
on the DDTC website.
Designate Corporate Administrator
If Registration Action is “New,” the applicant must designate an initial corporate administrator who will be
responsible for managing user roles within the DDTC electronic system for the applicant’s users. If there
DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 14 of 15

will only be one user of the system, that person must be the designated corporate administrator. The
corporate administrator must be a direct employee of the applicant. Refer to the DDTC website for more
information about adding or removing Corporate Administrators. To designate the initial corporate
administrator, provide the following:
Name

Enter the first and last name of the designated corporate administrator.

Position/Title

Enter the position or title of the designated corporate administrator.

Telephone

Enter the primary telephone number for contacting the designated corporate
administrator.

Email

Enter the primary email address for contacting the designated corporate
administrator.

DS-2032 v5.3
05/01/2025

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED

Page 15 of 15

