Jose Barbeito
12/11/22
Essay on Reminiscence
“Tahiti is a magical place.” That is what Phil Coulson, senior agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. said,
after being reminded of his time recovering from being stabbed in the heart by Loki’s magic
spear. This happened in the first Avenger’s movie, but for anyone who watched the Agents of
Shield TV show, the phrase is familiar. Why is this important? Phil Coulson actually died, and
Shield spent seven days resurrecting him from the dead, during which he was put in extreme pain
and unimaginable stress, to the point that he would beg the doctors to let him die. To help save
Phil Coulson from the memory of his traumatic experience, the doctors replaced his memory of
the procedure with pleasant memories of a vacation on the island of Tahiti. Later in the show, the
reveal of his false memories causes a dramatic change in Phil’s view of life, and ends up causing
more harm than good to him and his friends. I will argue that tampering and revisiting the past
through memories is one the worst mistakes a person can make, and the movie Reminiscence
(along with the TV show Agents of Shield) does exactly that. Alongside the moral implications,
it connects heavily with Robert Nozick’s pleasure machine, and gives a perfect example of why
the pleasure machine is a black hole for moral perfection.
The movie Reminiscence, made in 2021, follows a similar theme. After a massive world
war, global warming, and ocean rise, the world retreats into a nocturnal, boat-filled life, the poor
reduced to living on rafts while the rich build their own private islands. Nick Bannister, an
ex-military interrogation officer, works with The Forge, a machine that allows people to relive
past memories. Bannister helps the person within the machine, guiding them through the
passageways of their mind, beginning with the memorable phrase, “We’re going on a journey. A
journey through memory. Your destination? A place and time you’ve been before.” The movie

explores the importance of memories, and how we view them. Nick Bannister becomes addicted
to the memories of a woman he loved, named Mae. After Mae disappears, Nick spends an
increasing amount of time in The Forge, reliving the same moments again and again, his life
slipping away into the past. When assisting the cops with a murder case in the real world, he
finds that Mae is still alive, and that their entire relationship was fabricated. As Nick sets off to
find her, he uses his memories as clues, each hint leading him into the right direction, following
the clues in the real world. In the end, he finds the man who killed Mae, and in visiting his
memories, finds a goodbye message left by Mae moments before her death, meant for Nick.
I know what you’re thinking. Great movie summary, leave the review on Rotten
Tomatoes, but how does this relate to anything real? Well, the themes and conclusions from the
movie are good answers to Robert Nozick’s Pleasure Machine thought experiment. Nozick
proposed that if the ultimate goal of life was to be the happiest you could be, then the best thing
for each person to do would be to be hooked up to a machine that simulates the best pleasures in
life, allows our brains to be filled with chemical soup that brings nothing but pleasure and
happiness. This is exactly what happens in Reminiscence - people decide to forgo the hardships
of the real world and sink into the blissful memories of the past. Yet is this what we should be
doing with our lives? Wasting away the moments living in a fake world, perceived only by our
mind’s eye? I would argue that we should not, and that doing so erodes the meaning of humanity
and true happiness.
At first, the idea of the pleasure machine may seem appealing. After all, who wouldn't
want to be able to have any experience they desire, without having to worry about the constraints
of reality? But Nozick points out that there are some important drawbacks to the experience
machine. For one, the person in the machine is not actually experiencing the things they think

they are experiencing. The experiences they have in the machine are not real, and are therefore
not authentic. This lack of authenticity is at the heart of Nozick's critique of the experience
machine. He argues that authenticity is an important part of human experience, and that we value
our experiences in part because they are real and not simulated. In other words, we value the
present moment because it is real and not just a simulation. I would argue the same, and so
would Mae from Reminiscence, saying “Maybe memory fades for a reason. If we just dwelled on
the bad things in the past, we’d never get over them. And if we just dwelled on the good, we
might never match it again.” This lines up perfectly with Nozick’s views that simulated pleasures
lack authenticity, and that the true importance of happiness is its hold on the real world.
In addition to the authenticity of happiness in the real world as compared to the simulated
one, another point that Reminiscence argues is the duality of sadness and happiness, and how
each makes the opposite all the more meaningful. At the end of the movie, Nick Bannister
decides to spend the rest of his life in The Forge, living out his happiness in the past instead of
making new memories in the present. Throughout the entire movie, Nick Bannister’s business
partner, Emily, is shown to struggle with her failed motherhood, choosing to drink her problems
away instead of searching for her daughter and caring for her. In the closing scene, Nick sits in
The Forge, old and gray, as Emily returns with her granddaughter, showing her ability to return
to her daughter and create a new relationship. Her granddaughter asks her why Bannister decided
to waste his life away in the past, and she responds with a quote that points at the heart of the
issue of the pleasure machine: “Missing people is a part of living. Without that sadness, you can’t
taste the sweet. A long time ago we both chose our endings. He turned back, and I chose ahead.”
Emily was the embodiment of looking towards the future, struggling through her hardship, and
finding happiness on the other side, whereas Nick was the sad soul who gave up his life,

spending the time he had living in the past, reliving old memories. He warned that he would
choose this earlier in the movie, ominously saying “Between memory and oblivion, I know which
torture I would choose.”
The pleasure machine is a great thought experiment. It strikes at the idea that the only
purpose of life is to be happy, a belief that I held for the longest time, until having to think about
it this year. The movie Reminiscence (and others, such as Agents of Shield), show us that living
false happiness is not true to life, and that there is no connection with any deeper reality when we
experience happiness within Nozick’s pleasure machine. It is only through real experiences can
we struggle through the troughs of despair and be truly happy on the other side. We as humans
desire to do the things that are pleasurable, not only because they give us pleasure, but because
we desire to see the outcomes of such actions. I know that I choose the pleasures of the present
and future - real, tangible, and as unpredictable as the weather - than choose to live a life hooked
up to a machine that is programmed to give me nothing but the most meaningless of pleasure.
Nick Banister said it best in the closing scene of Reminiscence, saying “The past doesn't haunt
us, it wouldn’t even recognize us. If there are ghosts to be found, it’s us who haunt the past.”

