Because learning changes everything. ®

Fit & Well:
Core Concepts and Labs in Physical Fitness and Wellness
15th Edition
Thomas D. Fahey
Paul M. Insel
Walton T. Roth
Claire E. Insel

2: Principles of Physical Fitness
© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC.

Looking Ahead...
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Describe how much physical activity is recommended for
developing health and fitness.
• Identify the components of physical fitness and the way each
component affects wellness.
• Explain the goal and basic principles of physical training.
• Describe the principles involved in designing a well-rounded
exercise program.
• List the steps for making an exercise program safe, effective,
and successful.

© McGraw Hill LLC

2

Physical Activity and Exercise
for Health and Fitness
Almost any kind of physical activity promotes health.
Try to be more active during the day.
• Try to get up and move around each hour when studying,
working on the computer, or watching TV.

Physical activity and exercise are points along a continuum.

© McGraw Hill LLC

3

Figure 2.1 Exercise promotes longevity
The risk of death each year from all causes decreases with increased
amounts and intensities of weekly physical activity.
Access the text alternative for slide images.

Source: Adapted from a composite of 12 studies involving more than 200,000 men and women. Wen, M., et al. 2014. “Physical activity and mortality among
middle-aged and older adults in the United States.” Journal Physical Activity & Health 11: 303–312.: Physical activity Guidelines Advisory Committee. Physical
Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee Report, 2008. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008. Schnohr, P., et al. 2015. Dose of
jogging and long-term mortality: The Copenhagen City Heart Study. Journal of the American College of Cardiology 65(5): 411–419.
© McGraw Hill LLC

4

Physical Activity on a Continuum
Physical activity: body movement that is carried out by the
skeletal muscles and requires energy.
Exercise: planned, structured, repetitive movement
intended to improve or maintain physical fitness.

Physical activity is essential to health and confers wideranging health benefits, but exercise is necessary to
significantly improve physical fitness.

© McGraw Hill LLC

5

Increasing Physical Activity to Improve
Health and Wellness 1
Recommendations for promoting health include the
following:
• For substantial health benefits, adults should do at least 150
minutes of moderate-intensity or 75 minutes of vigorousintensity aerobic physical activity each week.
• Increasing the volume and intensity of exercise results in
additional health benefits.
• Adults should also do muscle-strengthening activities.
• Everyone should avoid inactivity.

© McGraw Hill LLC

6

Figure 2.2 Added years of life associated with increasing
fitness levels
In a study that tracked fitness levels of more than 5,000 men for 47 years, higher cardiorespiratory
fitness levels were associated with increased longevity. The high fitness group lived nearly five years
longer than those with the lowest fitness levels.
Access the text alternative for slide images.
Source: From the data of Clausen, Johan SR, Jacob L. Marott, Andreas Holtermann, Finn Gyntelberg, and Magnus t. Jensen. Midlife Cardiorespiratory fitness
and the Long-Term risk of Mortality: 46 Years of Follow-Up. Journal of the American College of Cardiology 72, no. 9 (2018): 987-95.
© McGraw Hill LLC

7

Increasing Physical Activity to Improve
Health and Wellness 2
Physical activity benefits people of all ages and of all racial
and ethnic groups, including people with disabilities.
Moderate physical activity uses about 150 calories of
energy and causes a noticeable increase in heart rate.
• Calorie: the commonly used term for kilocalorie (which is
actually 1,000 calories), a measure of energy equal to the heat
it takes to raise the temperature of one liter of water 1°C.

© McGraw Hill LLC

8

Increasing Physical Activity to Improve
Health and Wellness 3
Vigorous physical activity causes rapid breathing and a
substantial increase in heart rate.
The daily total of physical activity can be accumulated in
multiple bouts of 10 or more minutes per day.

© McGraw Hill LLC

John P Kelly/The Image Bank/Getty Images

9

Figure 2.3 Examples of
moderate-intensity
physical activity
Each example uses about 150 calories.

Access the text alternative for slide images.
© McGraw Hill LLC

Source: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Guide to Physical Activity (https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/educational/lose_wt/phy_act.htm); accessed August 23, 2021.

10

Table 2.1 Moderate- and Vigorous-Intensity Exercise
MODERATE-INTENSITY ACTIVITY:
VIGOROUS-INTENSITY ACTIVITY:
Uses 3.5–7 calories per minute and causes your breathing Uses more than 7 calories per minute and increases your

and heart rate to increase but still allows for comfortable heart and breathing rates considerably. These exercises
cause larger increases in physical fitness:
conversation:
• Group exercise: high-impact step aerobics, aerobic
• Actively playing with children or pets.
dance.
• Archery.
• Backpacking.
• Ballroom dancing.
• Basketball, recreational.
• Bicycling or stationary bike, moderate pace.
• Bicycling, high intensity.
• Downhill skiing, moderate intensity.
• Calisthenics, vigorous: jumping jacks, burpees, air squats.
• Figure skating, recreational.
• Circuit weight training.
• Fly fishing or walking along stream.
• Cross-country skiing or snowshoeing.
• Gardening or yard work, moderate pace.
• Cross-training, such as CrossFit.
• Golf.
• Downhill skiing, vigorous intensity.
• Hiking, leisurely pace.
• Football, recreational.
• Horseback riding, recreational.
• Gardening or yard work, shoveling heavy snow, digging
• Housework, moderate intensity.
ditches.
• Skateboarding.
• Hand cycling.
• Softball.
• Using stair-climber, elliptical trainer, or rowing machine, • High-intensity interval training: running, elliptical trainer,
swimming, cycling.
moderate pace.
• Horseback riding, galloping or jumping.
• Table tennis.
• In line skating.
• Tennis, doubles.
• Walking at a moderate pace: walking to school or work, • Jogging.
• Kayaking, whitewater.
walking for pleasure.
• Pushing a car.
• Water aerobics.
• Running up stairs.
• Waxing the car.
• Soccer, recreational.
• Weight training and bodybuilding.
• Tennis, singles.
• Yoga.
• Wheelchair wheeling training.
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2015. General Physical Activities Defined by Level of Intensity
(www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/ physical /pdf/PA_Intensity_table_2_1.pdf).
© McGraw Hill LLC

11

Increasing Physical Activity
to Manage Weight
Two-thirds of Americans are overweight.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has
published guidelines focusing on weight management:
• To prevent weight gain, lose weight, or maintain weight-loss,
150–300 minutes per week of physical activity may not be
enough.
• Up to 90 minutes of physical activity per day is recommended.

© McGraw Hill LLC

12

Exercising to Improve Physical Fitness
People can obtain greater health and wellness benefits by
increasing the duration and intensity of physical activity.
Physical fitness requires more intense movement that poses
a substantially greater challenge to the body.

© McGraw Hill LLC

Tempura/E+/Getty Images

13

Table 2.2 Physical Activity and Exercise Recommendations for
Promoting General Health, Fitness, and Weight Management
GOAL

RECOMMENDATION

General health

Perform moderate-intensity aerobic physical activity for at least 150 minutes
per week (30 minutes 5 times per week) or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity
physical activity per week (25 minutes 3 times per week). Also, be more active
in your daily life: Walk instead of driving, take the stairs instead of the elevator,
and watch less TV.

Increased health benefits

Exercise at moderate intensity for 300 minutes per week or at vigorous
intensity for 150 minutes per week.

Achieve or maintain weight loss

Exercise moderately for 60–90 minutes per day on most days of the week.

Muscle strength and endurance

Perform one or more sets of resistance exercises that work the major muscle
groups for 8–12 repetitions (10–15 reps for older adults) on at least two nonconsecutive days per week. Examples include weight training and exercises
that use body weight as resistance (such as core-stabilizing exercises, pull-ups,
push-ups, lunges, and squats).

Flexibility

Perform range-of-motion (stretching) exercises at least two or three days per
week. Hold each stretch for 10–30 seconds.

Neuromuscular training

Older adults should do balance training at least two or three days per week.
Examples include yoga, tai chi, and balance exercises (standing on one foot,
step-ups, and walking lunges). These exercises are beneficial for young and
middle-aged adults, as well.

Sources: American College of Sports Medicine. 2022. ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer. Garber, C.E., et al. 2011. Quantity and quality of exercise for
developing and maintaining cardiorespiratory, musculoskeletal, and neuromotor fitness in apparently healthy adults: Guidance for prescribing exercise. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 43(7): 1334–1359;
2018 Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee. 2018. 2018 Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee Scientific Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

© McGraw Hill LLC

14

How Much Physical Activity Is Enough?
Regular physical activity, regardless of intensity, makes you
healthier and can help protect you from chronic disease.
You obtain even more benefits when you are physically fit.
• Fit people have more energy and better body control and can
enjoy a more active lifestyle.

Some physical activity is better than none.
More physical activity is better than some—as long as it
does not result in injury.

© McGraw Hill LLC

15

Components of Physical Fitness
Health-related fitness—physical capacities that contribute
to health—includes the following components:
•
•
•
•
•

© McGraw Hill LLC

Cardiorespiratory endurance.
Muscular strength.
Muscular endurance.
Flexibility.
Body composition.

16

Cardiorespiratory Endurance
Cardiorespiratory endurance: the ability of the body to
perform prolonged, large-muscle, dynamic exercise at
moderate to high levels of intensity.
• It depends on such factors as the ability of the lungs to deliver
oxygen to the bloodstream.
• Oxygen: an element that is critical for generating usable
energy in the body and is an important component of
carbohydrates, fats, and proteins.

Cardiorespiratory endurance is a central component of
health-related fitness because heart and lung function is so
essential to overall good health.
© McGraw Hill LLC

17

Muscular Strength
Muscular strength: the ability of a muscle to exert force in
a single maximum effort.
• Relative strength: the maximum force exerted, relative to
body weight, body size, and muscle size.
• Greater muscle mass means a higher rate of metabolism—
the sum of all the vital processes by which food energy and
nutrients are made available to and used by the body.

Maintaining strength and muscle mass is vital for healthy
aging.

© McGraw Hill LLC

18

Muscular Endurance
Muscular endurance: the ability of a muscle to remain
contracted or to contract repeatedly for a long period of
time.
Muscular endurance is important for good posture and for
injury prevention.

© McGraw Hill LLC

19

Flexibility
Flexibility: the ability to move joints through their full
ranges of motion.
• It depends on joint structure, the length and elasticity of
connective tissue, and nervous system activity.

Inactivity causes the joints to become stiffer with age.
• That stiffness often leads people to assume unnatural
postures that can stress joints and muscles.
• Stretching can help ensure a healthy range of motion.

© McGraw Hill LLC

20

Body Composition
Body composition: the proportion of fat and fat-free mass
(muscle, bone, and water) in the body.
• Healthy body composition involves a high proportion of fatfree mass and an acceptably low level of body fat.
• Fat-free mass: the nonfat component of the human body,
consisting of skeletal muscle, bone, and water.

Somatotype affects a person’s choice of exercise.
• Somatotype: a body-type classification system that describes
people as predominantly muscular (mesomorph), tall and thin
(ectomorph), or round and heavy (endomorph).

© McGraw Hill LLC

21

Skill (Neuromuscular)–Related
Components of Fitness
Skill (neuromuscular)–related fitness: physical capacities
that contribute to performance in a sport or an activity.
• These include speed, power,
agility, balance, coordination, and
reaction and movement time.

Skill-related fitness tends to be
sport-specific and is best
developed through practice.

© McGraw Hill LLC

Clive Mason/Getty Images

22

Principles of Physical Training:
Adaptation to Stress
The human body is adaptable, adjusting to meet increasing
demands.
• Adaptation: the physiological changes that occur with
exercise training.

Short-term adjustments lead to long-term changes and
improvements in fitness levels.
Physical training: the performance of different types of
activities that cause the body to adapt and improve its level
of fitness.

© McGraw Hill LLC

23

Specificity—Adapting to Type of Training
Specificity: the training principle that developing a
particular fitness component requires performing exercises
specifically designed for that component.
A well-rounded exercise program should include exercises
geared to each component of fitness.

© McGraw Hill LLC

24

Progressive Overload—
Adapting to the Amount of Training
Progressive overload: the training principle that
progressively increasing amounts of stress on the body
causes adaptation that improves fitness.
The amount of new activity added above a person’s usual
level is known as overload.
The amount of overload is important.
• The exercise needed to improve fitness depends on the
individual.

© McGraw Hill LLC

25

The FITT Principle
The overload needed to maintain or improve a particular
level of fitness for a particular fitness component is
determined through four dimensions known as FITT:
•
•
•
•

Frequency—how often.
Intensity—how hard or how fast.
Time—how long (duration).
Type—mode of activity.

Additional components to consider:
• Volume—how much (frequency × intensity × time).
• Progression—how a program advances over time.
© McGraw Hill LLC

26

Reversibility—Adapting to a
Reduction in Training
Fitness is a reversible adaptation.
• The body adjusts to lower levels of physical activity the same
way it adjusts to higher levels.

Reversibility: the training principle that fitness
improvements are lost when demands on the body are
lowered.
If a person stops exercising, up to 50% of fitness
improvements are lost within two months.

© McGraw Hill LLC

27

Individual Differences—
Limits on Adaptability
There are large differences in our ability to improve fitness,
achieve a desirable body composition, and learn and
perform sports skills.
• People respond to training at different rates.
• Specific genes influence body fat, strength, and endurance.

However, physical training
improves fitness regardless
of heredity.

© McGraw Hill LLC

doble-d/iStock/Getty Images

28

Designing Your Own Exercise Program 1
Getting medical clearance:
• Risk from death in exercise is small.
• People of any age who are not at high risk for serious health
problems can safely exercise at a moderate intensity.
• The Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire for Everyone
(PAR-Q+) can help evaluate exercise safety.
• Physicians may recommend an exercise stress test or a graded
exercise test (GXT) to determine if a person might have heart
problems when exercising.

© McGraw Hill LLC

29

Designing Your Own Exercise Program 2
Assessing yourself:
• Assess your current level of fitness for each of the five healthrelated fitness components.

Setting goals:
• The ultimate goal of every health-related fitness program is
wellness that lasts a lifetime.
• Your specific goals must be important enough to you to keep
you motivated.
• First, think carefully about your goals, and be clear about why
you are starting a program.

© McGraw Hill LLC

30

Designing Your Own Exercise Program 3
Choosing activities for a balanced program:
• An ideal fitness program combines a physically active lifestyle
with systematic exercise to maintain physical fitness.
• Cardiorespiratory endurance is developed by continuous
rhythmic movements of large-muscle groups.
• Muscular strength and endurance can be developed through
resistance training or calisthenics.
• Flexibility is developed by stretching the major muscle groups
regularly and with proper technique.
• Healthy body composition can be developed through a
sensible diet and regular exercise.

© McGraw Hill LLC

31

Figure 2.4 Physical activity pyramid
Access the text alternative for slide images.
George Doyle/Stockbyte/Getty Images; Ryan McVay/Photodisc/Getty Images; Photo taken by Shirlee Stevens;
Westend61/Getty Images; Gioele Mottarlini/ Shutterstock; Mike Kemp/Tetra Images, LLC/Alamy Stock Photo
© McGraw Hill LLC

32

Table 2.3 ACSM Exercise Recommendations for Healthy Adults:
Develop and Maintain Cardiorespiratory Endurance and Body Composition
COMPONENT

RECOMMENDATION

Frequency of
training

At least five days per week for moderate-intensity exercise and at least three days per week for
vigorous-intensity exercise.

Intensity of
training

55/65–90% of maximum heart rate or 40/50–85% of heart rate reserve or oxygen uptake
reserve. (Reserve refers to the difference between resting and maximum values of heart rate or
oxygen consumption.) The lower-intensity values (55–64% of maximum heart rate and 40–49%
of heart rate reserve plus rest) are most applicable to unfit individuals. For average individuals,
intensities of 70–85% of maximum heart rate or 60–80% of heart rate reserve plus rest are
appropriate. Well-trained people can train at near maximum intensities. These methods
increase exercise intensity within the limits of each person’s reserve capacity.

Time (duration) of
training

20–60 total minutes per day of continuous or intermittent (in sessions lasting 10 or more
minutes) aerobic activity. Duration depends on the intensity of activity; thus, low-intensity
activity should be conducted over a longer period of time (30 minutes or more). Low- to
moderate-intensity activity of longer duration is recommended for nonathletic adults.

Type (mode) of
activity

Any activity that uses large-muscle groups, can be maintained continuously, and is rhythmic and
aerobic in nature—for example, walking-hiking, running-jogging, bicycling, cross-country skiing,
aerobic dancing and other forms of group exercise, rope-skipping, rowing, stair-climbing,
swimming, skating, and endurance game activities.

Volume

Expend the equivalent of at least 1,000 calories per week, which is equivalent to about 150
minutes per week of moderate-intensity exercise.

Progression

Adjust frequency, intensity, and/or time until you reach your goal.

Chapter 3 has instructions for calculating target heart rate intensity for cardiorespiratory endurance exercise.
Sources: American College of Sports Medicine. 2022. ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer; Garber, C. E., et al. 2011. “Quantity and quality of exercise for
developing and maintaining cardiorespiratory, musculoskeletal, and neuromotor fitness in apparently healthy adults: Guidance for prescribing exercise,” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 43(7): 1334–1359.

© McGraw Hill LLC

33

Table 2.3 ACSM Exercise Recommendations for Healthy Adults:
Develop and Maintain Muscular Strength and Endurance, Flexibility, and Body Composition
COMPONENT

RECOMMENDATION

Resistance
training

One set of 8–10 exercises that condition the major muscle groups, performed two to three
days per week. Most people should complete 8–12 repetitions of each exercise to the point of
fatigue; practicing other repetition ranges (for example., 3–5 or 1215) also builds strength and
endurance; for older and frailer people (approximately 50–60 and older), 10–15 repetitions
with a lighter weight may be more appropriate. Multiple-set regimens will provide greater
benefits if time allows. Any mode of exercise that is comfortable throughout the full range of
motion is appropriate (for example., free weights, kettlebells, calisthenics, elastic bands, or
weight machines).

Flexibility training

Static stretches, performed for the major muscle groups at least two to three days per week,
ideally daily. Stretch to the point of tightness, holding each stretch for 10–30 seconds;
perform 2–4 repetitions of each stretch, for a total of 90 seconds of stretching time for each
exercise.

Sources: American College of Sports Medicine. 2022. ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer;
Garber, C. E., et al. 2011. Quantity and quality of exercise for developing and maintaining cardiorespiratory, musculoskeletal, and neuromotor fitness in
apparently healthy adults: Guidance for prescribing exercise, Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 43(7): 1334–1359.

© McGraw Hill LLC

34

Figure 2.5 Health and fitness benefits of different
amounts of physical activity and exercise
Access the text alternative for slide images.
© McGraw Hill LLC

Rubberball Productions/Photodisc/Getty Images; Ljupco Smokovski/123RF; Juriah Mosin/Alamy Stock Photo

35

Designing Your Own Exercise Program 4
Guidelines for training:
Train the way you want your body to change.
Train regularly.
Start slowly, and get in shape gradually.
• Beginning phase: the body adjusts.
• Progress phase: fitness increases.
• Maintenance phase: the targeted level of fitness is sustained
over the long term.

• Increase duration and frequency before intensity.
• Overtraining: a condition caused by training too much or
too intensely, resulting in lack of energy, decreased physical
performance, and aching muscles and joints.
© McGraw Hill LLC

36

Designing Your Own Exercise Program 5
Guidelines for training, continued:
Warm-up before exercise.
Cool down after exercise.
Exercise safely.
•
•
•
•
•
•

© McGraw Hill LLC

Protect yourself with the appropriate clothing and gear.
Take a partner when exercising in deserted areas.
Give vehicles plenty of leeway.
Take precautions in the weight room.
Always use good technique.
Overloading your muscles and joints can lead to serious injury,
so train within your capacity.

37

Designing Your Own Exercise Program 6
Guidelines for training, continued:
•
•
•
•

© McGraw Hill LLC

Listen to your body and get adequate rest.
Cycle the volume and intensity of your workouts.
Vary your activities.
Train with a partner.

NDAB Creativity/Shutterstock

38

Designing Your Own Exercise Program 7
Guidelines for training, continued:
Train your mind.
• Becoming fit requires commitment, discipline, and patience.

Fuel your activity appropriately.
Have fun.
Track your progress.
Get help and advice if you need it.
Keep your exercise program in perspective.

© McGraw Hill LLC

39

Figure 2.6 Progression of an exercise program
This figure shows how you can increase the amount of overload gradually in a walking and running program.
Begin with slow walking for several weeks and gradually pick up the pace. Gradually introduce short periods
of running during your walks, progressively running farther and walking less until you can run continuously.
Add interval training after four to six weeks of jogging—if you want to reach higher levels of fitness.
Regardless of the activity and the exercise program, begin slowly and progress gradually. After you achieve
the desired level of fitness, you can maintain it by exercising three to five days a week.
Access the text alternative for slide images.
SOURCE: Progression data from American College of Sports Medicine. 2022. ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and
Prescription, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins Health.
© McGraw Hill LLC

40

Test Your Knowledge
Is it true that to improve your health, you must exercise
vigorously for at least 30 minutes straight, five or more
days per week?
Which activity uses about 150 calories?
•
•
•
•

Washing a car for 45–60 minutes;
Shooting a basketball for 30 minutes;
Jumping rope for 15 minutes; or
All three?

Is it true that regular exercise can make a person smarter?

© McGraw Hill LLC

41

Because learning changes everything. ®
www.mheducation.com

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC.

