CH316 Final Exam Study Guide
The Final exam is meant to test your understanding of the objectives of the experiments you
performed in the lab, the reason for major step in the procedure including instrument setup and
operation where applicable, as well as data interpretation including calculations. The exam will
include multiple choice, fill in the blank, short answer and calculation questions.
Review of calculations and questions included in the quizzes and in the lab report submissions
should help you prepare for the final exam. Additional information is provided here to help you
better prepare for the Final. In order to do well on the final exam, you should be able to:
Answer concept questions related to experiments performed in the lab. Examples include:
1. Identify buffer and equivalence point regions of a titration curve
2. Identify point on the titration curve of a weak acid with a strong base that corresponds to
the pKa of a weak acid
3. Describe the difference between a pH electrode and a fluoride ion selective electrode.
4. Define LOD and how can it be calculated. What was the order of magnitude of the limit
of detection in the molecular fluorescence experiment (e.g. mg/mL, ng/mL, µg/mL)?
5. Apply the quantitative laws of absorption and emission spectroscopy, chromatography,
and Potentiometry
6. Recognize which technique generally offers a lower detection limit, molecular absorption
or emission (fluorescence)?
7. What is a matrix effect? What type of calibration is best to deal with a matrix effect?
8. Describe the standard addition calibration method. How can one decide if standard
addition should be used instead of the regular calibration method?
9. Describe the method of calibration with internal standard. How can one decide if an
internal standard should be used?
10. Describe if a more polar compound will elute earlier or later than a less polar compound
on a C18 column. How does increasing the %organic in the mobile phase affect the
retention time of a component on a C18 column?
11. How does changing the column temperature affect retention times in GC?
Describe or give the reason for major steps in the lab procedures. Examples include:
1. Recognize appropriate tools for measuring mass and volume in quantitative analysis
(analytical balance, volumetric glassware) and their proper use (e.g. handling weighing
flasks with tongues and not blowing the last drop from a volumetric pipet)
2. Differentiate between/give examples of sources of random error and sources of
systematic error in lab measurements.
3. Describe how to calibrate a volumetric pipet. What type of error does calibration get rid
of (random or systematic)?

4. During an acid-base titration, if the titrant used is NaOH and the buret is washed with DI
water but not conditioned with NaOH, will the calculated [H+ ] concentration be higher or
lower than the true value?
5. Explain why TISAB is added to all fluoride standards and unknowns during the analysis of
fluoride using an ion selective electrode? If TISAB was not added and the unknown
solution is too basic (high pH) how will that affect the observed potential reading or the
calculated fluoride concentration (higher or lower than true value?) ..etc.
6. Explain why was the molybdate reagent added to the phosphorus solutions in the
molecular absorption experiment.
7. Explain why was H2SO4 added to all standards and unknowns during the fluorescence
experiment.
8. Recognize that in all calibration experiments, dilution schemes of unknowns are devised
such that the response from the unknown falls closer to the middle of the calibration
curve.
9. Why was a potassium solution added to all standards and unknowns in the atomic
absorption and emission experiments? Be able to answer related questions such as:
a. How would the detected signals from sodium emission and calcium absorption be
impacted if the potassium solution were not added?
b. Does the presence of the ionization suppressor (K+ ) change the ion/neutral
fraction? Increase/decrease?
10. Explain why uracil was added to the steroid sample in chromatographic separation by
HPLC?
11. Why was butylbenzene added to all limonene standard and unknown solutions in the GC
experiment?
Perform solution calculations similar to those performed in the lab and lab report. Examples
include:
1. Perform dilution and stoichiometric calculations to determine concentrations of stock
and working standards.
2. Determine concentration of unknowns from quantitative laws of absorption, emission
spectroscopy, potentiometry and chromatography.
3. Devise a dilution scheme for the preparation of an unknown solution to target the middle
of a calibration curve (e.g. given a calibration curve, devise a dilution scheme to prepare
a dilute soy sauce solution given the label Na content).
Perform data analysis calculations similar to those submitted in lab reports. Examples include:
1. Calculate standard error from averaging repeat measurements or from linear regression
(calibration curve) calculations.
2. Recognize the output from Linest function in Excel and be able to use it in calculations.
3. Propagate error from measured concentration of dilute unknown to original sample (e.g.
error in %P2O5 in a fertilizer sample, %w/v fluoride in mouthwash, quinine in tonic water).

4. Calculate the 95% confidence limit (CLvalue = t*svalue ) in a reported value - select the
appropriate degrees of freedom to find t based on repeat measurement or linear
regression.
5. Report results to the correct number of significant figures based on the confidence limit.
6. Perform a t test to determine if an observed value is significantly different than an
expected value at the 95% confidence level.
7. Calculate unknown concentration and standard error from linear regression for normal
calibration curves with or without internal standard (e.g. calculations in Na emission and
GC labs) and for calibration curves with standard addition (e.g. calculations in Ca
absorption lab). For calculations involving sc and sxo , know what values go in the
equations.

