FUNDAMENTAL
PRINCIPLES OF
POLYMERIC MATERIALS

FUNDAMENTAL
PRINCIPLES OF
POLYMERIC MATERIALS
Third Edition

CHRISTOPHER S. BRAZEL
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering
The University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa, Alabama

STEPHEN L. ROSEN
Department of Chemical Engineering
University of Missouri-Rolla
Rolla, Missouri

Copyright Ó 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted
under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission
of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470,
or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to
the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011,
fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permission.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability
or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or
written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation.
You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable
for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States
at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site
at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Brazel, Christopher S., 1970Fundamental principles of polymeric materials / Christopher S. Brazel, Stephen L. Rosen. -3rd ed.
pages cm
Revised edition of: Fundamental principles of polymeric materials / Stephen L. Rosen. 2nd
ed. c1993.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-50542-7
1. Polymers. I. Rosen, Stephen L., 1937- II. Rosen, Stephen L., 1937- Fundamental
principles of polymeric materials. III. Title.
TA455.P58R63 2012
668.9--dc23
2011052328
Printed in the United States of America
ISBN: 9780470505427
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

CONTENTS

PREFACE
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
1

xiii
xv
xvii

INTRODUCTION

1

Problems
References

7
7

PART I. POLYMER FUNDAMENTALS

9

2

TYPES OF POLYMERS

11

2.1 Reaction to Temperature
2.2 Chemistry of Synthesis
2.3 Structure
2.4 Conclusions
Problems
Reference

11
12
19
30
30
34

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF POLYMERS

35

3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

35
35
37
38

3

Types of Bonds
Bond Distances and Strengths
Bonding and Response to Temperature
Action of Solvents

v

vi

4

5

6

CONTENTS

3.5 Bonding and Molecular Structure
3.6 Stereoisomerism in Vinyl Polymers
3.7 Stereoisomerism in Diene Polymers
3.8 Summary
Problems
References

39
40
42
44
44
45

POLYMER MORPHOLOGY

46

4.1
4.2

Amorphous and Crystalline Polymers
The Effect of Polymer Structure, Temperature, and Solvent
on Crystallinity
4.3 The Effect of Crystallinity on Polymer Density
4.4 The Effect of Crystallinity on Mechanical Properties
4.5 The Effect of Crystallinity on Optical Properties
4.6 Models for the Crystalline Structure of Polymers
4.7 Extended Chain Crystals
4.8 Liquid Crystal Polymers
Problems
References

47

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

61

5.1 Introduction
5.2 Average Molecular Weights
5.3 Determination of Average Molecular Weights
5.4 Molecular Weight Distributions
5.5 Gel Permeation (or Size-Exclusion) Chromatography (GPC, SEC)
5.6 Summary
Problems
References

61
62
66
75
79
85
86
89

THERMAL TRANSITIONS IN POLYMERS

91

6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6
6.7
6.8
6.9
6.10

91
91
92
92
95
97
97
100
101
102

Introduction
The Glass Transition
Molecular Motions in an Amorphous Polymer
Determination of Tg
Factors that Influence Tg
The Effect of Copolymerization on Tg
The Thermodynamics of Melting
The Metastable Amorphous State
The Influence of Copolymerization on Thermal Properties
Effect of Additives on Thermal Properties

48
49
50
51
53
56
57
59
60

CONTENTS

7

vii

6.11 General Observations about Tg and Tm
6.12 Effects of Crosslinking
6.13 Thermal Degradation of Polymers
6.14 Other Thermal Transitions
Problems
References

103
103
103
104
104
106

POLYMER SOLUBILITY AND SOLUTIONS

107

7.1 Introduction
7.2 General Rules for Polymer Solubility
7.3 Typical Phase Behavior in Polymer–Solvent Systems
7.4 The Thermodynamic Basis of Polymer Solubility
7.5 The Solubility Parameter
7.6 Hansen’s Three-Dimensional Solubility Parameter
7.7 The Flory–Huggins Theory
7.8 Properties of Dilute Solutions
7.9 Polymer–Polmyer-Common Solvent Systems
7.10 Polymer Solutions, Suspensions, and Emulsions
7.11 Concentrated Solutions: Plasticizers
Problems
References

107
107
109
110
112
114
116
118
121
121
122
124
126

PART II. POLYMER SYNTHESIS

129

8

STEP-GROWTH (CONDENSATION) POLYMERIZATION

131

8.1 Introduction
8.2 Statistics of Linear Step-Growth Polymerization
8.3 Number-Average Chain Lengths
8.4 Chain Lengths on a Weight Basis
8.5 Gel Formation
8.6 Kinetics of Polycondensation
Problems
References

131
132
133
136
137
142
143
145

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH)
POLYMERIZATION

146

9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5

146
147
148
149
153

9

Introduction
Mechanism of Polymerization
Gelation in Addition Polymerization
Kinetics of Homogeneous Polymerization
Instantaneous Average Chain Lengths

viii

CONTENTS

9.6
9.7
9.8

10

11

12

Temperature Dependence of Rate and Chain Length
Chain Transfer and Reaction Inhibitors
Instantaneous Distributions in Free-Radical Addition
Polymerization
9.9 Instantaneous Quantities
9.10 Cumulative Quantities
9.11 Relations Between Instantaneous and Cumulative Average
Chain Lengths for a Batch Reactor
9.12 Emulsion Polymerization
9.13 Kinetics of Emulsion Polymerization in Stage II, Case 2
9.14 Summary
Problems
References

155
157

ADVANCED POLYMERIZATION METHODS

185

10.1 Introduction
10.2 Cationic Polymerization
10.3 Anionic Polymerization
10.4 Kinetics of Anionic Polymerization
10.5 Group-Transfer Polymerization
10.6 Atom Transfer Radical Polymerization
10.7 Heterogeneous Stereospecific Polymerization
10.8 Grafted Polymer Surfaces
10.9 Summary
Problems
References

185
185
186
192
194
195
196
202
203
203
205

COPOLYMERIZATION

207

11.1 Introduction
11.2 Mechanism
11.3 Significance of Reactivity Ratios
11.4 Variation of Composition with Conversion
11.5 Copolymerization Kinetics
11.6 Penultimate Effects and Charge-Transfer Complexes
11.7 Summary
Problems
References

207
207
209
210
216
216
217
217
219

POLYMERIZATION PRACTICE

220

12.1
12.2

220
220

Introduction
Bulk Polymerization

160
165
166
169
173
176
180
180
183

CONTENTS

ix

12.3 Gas-Phase Olefin Polymerization
12.4 Solution Polymerization
12.5 Interfacial Polycondensation
12.6 Suspension Polymerization
12.7 Emulsion Polymerization
12.8 Summary
Problems
References

225
226
228
229
232
234
234
235

PART III. POLYMER PROPERTIES

237

13

RUBBER ELASTICITY

239

13.1 Introduction
13.2 Thermodynamics of Elasticity
13.3 Statistics of Ideal Rubber Elasticity
13.4 Summary
Problems
References

239
239
246
248
248
249

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW AND THE RHEOLOGICAL
BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS

250

14.1 Introduction
14.2 Basic Definitions
14.3 Relations Between Shear Force and Shear Rate: Flow Curves
14.4 Time-Dependent Flow Behavior
14.5 Polymer Melts and Solutions
14.6 Quantitative Representation of Flow Behavior
14.7 Temperature Dependence of Flow Properties
14.8 Influence of Molecular Weight on Flow Properties
14.9 The Effects of Pressure on Viscosity
14.10 Viscous Energy Dissipation
14.11 Poiseuille Flow
14.12 Turbulent Flow
14.13 Drag Reduction
14.14 Summary
Problems
References

250
251
252
254
255
256
259
262
263
264
265
268
269
271
271
274

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

276

15.1
15.2

276
276

14

15

Introduction
Mechanical Models for Linear Viscoelastic Response

x

16

CONTENTS

15.3 The Four-Parameter Model and Molecular Response
15.4 Viscous or Elastic Response? The Deborah Number
15.5 Quantitative Approaches to Model Viscoelasticity
15.6 The Boltzmann Superposition Principle
15.7 Dynamic Mechanical Testing
15.8 Summary
Problems
References

285
288
289
293
297
304
304
307

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

308

16.1 Introduction
16.2 Mechanical Properties of Polymers
16.3 Axial Tensiometers
16.4 Viscosity Measurement
16.5 Dynamic Mechanical Analysis: Techniques
16.6 Time–Temperature Superposition
16.7 Summary
Problems
References

308
308
309
311
316
323
329
329
332

PART IV. POLYMER PROCESSING AND PERFORMANCE

335

17

PROCESSING

337

17.1 Introduction
17.2 Molding
17.3 Extrusion
17.4 Blow Molding
17.5 Rotational, Fluidized-Bed, and Slush Molding
17.6 Calendering
17.7 Sheet Forming (Thermoforming)
17.8 Stamping
17.9 Solution Casting
17.10 Casting
17.11 Reinforced Thermoset Molding
17.12 Fiber Spinning
17.13 Compounding
17.14 Lithography
17.15 Three-Dimensional (Rapid) Prototyping
17.16 Summary
Problems
References

337
337
344
347
348
349
350
351
351
351
352
353
355
358
358
359
359
360

CONTENTS

18

19

20

21

22

xi

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: PLASTICS AND PLASTIC
ADDITIVES

361

18.1 Introduction
18.2 Plastics
18.3 Mechanical Properties of Plastics
18.4 Contents of Plastic Compounds
18.5 Sheet Molding Compound for Plastics
18.6 Plastics Recycling
Problems
References

361
361
362
363
371
373
374
374

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: RUBBERS
AND THERMOPLASTIC ELASTOMERS

375

19.1 Introduction
19.2 Thermoplastic Elastomers
19.3 Contents of Rubber Compounds
19.4 Rubber Compounding
References

375
375
376
379
379

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: SYNTHETIC FIBERS

380

20.1
20.2
20.3
20.4
20.5

Synthetic Fibers
Fiber Processing
Fiber Dyeing
Other Fiber Additives and Treatments
Effects of Heat and Moisture on Polymer Fibers

380
380
381
381
381

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: SURFACE FINISHES
AND COATINGS

383

21.1 Surface Finishes
21.2 Solventless Coatings
21.3 Electrodeposition
21.4 Microencapsulation
Problem
References

383
385
387
387
389
389

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: ADHESIVES

390

22.1 Adhesives
References

390
394

INDEX

395

PREFACE

This work has been edited and organized to provide a solid understanding of the main
concepts of polymeric materials at an introductory level, suitable for undergraduate and
beginning graduate students in disciplines ranging from chemistry and chemical engineering to materials science, polymer engineering, and mechanical engineering. The second
edition of the textbook was organized in a way that flowed naturally from molecular-level
considerations to bulk properties, mechanical behavior, and processing methods. I have
kept that organization intact with this third edition. I have used this book in teaching a
polymer materials engineering course over the past several years, and find that enough
information is presented without overwhelming students in detail (i.e., for more detailed
courses beyond the introductory polymer class).
One of the big challenges in updating a textbook is to include some of the newer
materials, methods, and issues surrounding polymer science while editing and refining the
original material so that the end product remains fairly streamlined and provides a balance
between describing theories and methodologies while treating each subject with an
appropriate weighting. (Of course, instructors are certainly invited to pick and choose
topics for their classes, and add material to that covered in the text, but I hope that this
provides a good, solid read for students learning the material for the first time without a
significant need to supplement the book on the instructor’s behalf and without providing so
much information that significant portions of the book must be passed over in a onesemester course.)
The text should be suitable for advanced undergraduates and beginning graduate
students in disciplines ranging from chemical engineering and chemistry to materials
science and mechanical engineering. I have taught mixed classes with just this background
using the second edition, and usually found that some introductory information (such as
organic chemical structures) was needed—both for students who had not been formally
trained in organic chemistry and for those who needed a refresher. This edition now
includes a short section in Chapters 1 and 2 on organic functional groups, with an emphasis
on some of the structures found in condensation polymerizations. Several instances of
xiii

xiv

PREFACE

natural polymers are included in structures and examples, including starches and polypeptides, to make the important connection that may building blocks of biology are also
polymers.
Some reorganization and combination was done in the third edition, with Chapters 3 and
4 from the previous edition combined, and some of the detailed information on polymer
rheology and transport was shortened so that students could be introduced to the material
without being overwhelmed. Only small sections were removed, and at many instances,
new materials were added, such as the addition of techniques for polymer analysis,
processing techniques (including three-dimensional prototyping), and the inclusion of
microencapsulation with the coatings section. Updates to advanced polymerization
techniques includes some of the emerging techniques to make well-defined polymers,
such as atom-transfer radical polymerization, although these methods are treated in a rather
brief sense, so that students can understand the basics of the technique improvements and
what advantages are achieved compared to other techniques. (In most cases, references
are given for those seeking more detail.)
Some of the things that I liked best about this book for teaching an introductory
polymers course have been retained. These areas include the description of processes to
formulate different products, along with sketches of the processes, the arrangement of the
book in going from molecular to macromolecular to physical structures, and the general
tone of the book that attempts to connect with the reader through examples that may be
familiar to them.
New homework problems have been introduced throughout, primarily those that I have
found useful in teaching.
CHRISTOPHER S. BRAZEL
Tuscaloosa, AL
August 2011

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

This work was written to provide an appreciation of those fundamental principles of
polymer science and engineering that are currently of practical relevance. I hope the reader
will obtain both a broad, unified introduction to the subject matter that will be of immediate
practical value and a foundation for more advanced study.
A decade has passed since the publication of the first Wiley edition of this book. New
developments in the polymer area during that decade justify an update. Having used the
book in class during the period, I’ve thought of better ways of explaining some of the
material, and these have been incorporated in this edition.
But the biggest change with this edition is the addition of end-of-chapter problems at the
suggestion of some academic colleagues. This should make the book more suitable as an
academic text. Most of these problems are old homework problems or exam questions. I
don’t know what I’m going to do for new exam questions, but I’ll think of something. Any
suggestions for additional problems will be gratefully accepted.
The first Wiley edition of this book in 1982 was preceded by a little paperback intended
primarily as a self-study guide for practicing engineers and scientists. I sincerely hope that
by adding material aimed at an academic audience I have not made the book less useful to
that original audience. To this end, I have retained the worked-out problems in the chapters
and added some new ones. I have tried to emphasize a qualitative understanding of the
underlying principles before tackling the mathematical details, so that the former may be
appreciated independently of the latter (I don’t recommend trying it the other way around,
however), and I have tried to include practical illustrations of the material whenever
possible.
In this edition, previous material has been generally updated. In view of commercial
developments over the decade, the discussion of extended-chain crystals has been
increased and a section on liquid-crystal polymers has been added. The discussion of
phase behavior in polymer-solvent systems has been expanded and the Flory–Huggins
theory is introduced. All kinetic expressions are now written in terms of conversion (rather
than monomer concentration) for greater generality and ease of application. Also, in
xv

xvi

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

deference to the ready availability of numerical-solution software, kinetic expressions now
incorporate the possibility of a variable-volume reaction mass, and the effects of variable
volume are illustrated in several examples. A section on group-transfer polymerization has
been added and a quantitative treatment of Ziegler–Natta polymerization has been
attempted for the first time, including three new worked-out examples. Processes based
on these catalysts are presented in greater detail. The “modified Cross” model, giving
viscosity as a function of both shear rate and temperature, is introduced and its utility is
illustrated. A section on scaleup calculations for the laminar flow of non-Newtonian fluids
has been added, including two worked-out examples. The discussion of three-dimensional
stress and strain has been expanded and includes two new worked-out examples.
Tobolsky’s “Procedure X” for extracting discrete relaxation times and moduli from data
is introduced.
Obviously, the choice of material to be covered involves subjective judgment on the part
of the author. This, together with space limitations and the rapid expansion of knowledge in
the field, has resulted in the omission or shallow treatment of many interesting subjects. I
apologize to friends and colleagues who have suggested incorporation of their work but
don’t find it here. Generally, it’s fine work, but too specialized for a book of this nature. The
end-of-chapter references are chosen to aid the reader who wishes to pursue a subject in
greater detail.
I have used the previous edition to introduce the macromolecular gospel to a variety of
audiences. Parts 1, 2 and most of 3 were covered in a one-semester course with chemistry
and chemical engineering seniors and graduate students at Carnegie-Mellon. At Toledo,
Parts 1 and 2 were covered in a one-quarter course with chemists and chemical engineers. A
second quarter covered Part 3 with additional quantitative material on processing added.
The audience for this included chemical and mechanical engineers (we didn’t mention
chemical reactions). Finally, I covered Parts 1 and 3 in one quarter with a diverse audience
of graduate engineers at the NASA–Lewis Research Labs.
A word to the student: To derive maximum benefit from the worked-out examples, make
an honest effort to answer them before looking at the solutions. If you can’t do one, you’ve
missed some important points in the preceding material, and you ought to go back over it.
STEPHEN L. ROSEN
Rolla, Missouri
November 1992

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The most important person to acknowledge is Dr. Stephen Rosen, who penned the first and
second editions of this book with a great vision for organizing the wealth of information on
polymers into a textbook covering the fundamentals that provided an excellent tool for
classroom learning. The guinea pigs (or students) who helped do a trial run of this edition in
my polymeric materials classes in 2011 provided corrections and suggestions throughout
the semester.
I greatly appreciate my departmental colleagues and university for allowing me a
sabbatical from my normal professor duties to expand my research and write several papers
as well as updating this book. I am also grateful to the U.S.–U.K. Fulbright Commission,
which partially funded my stay in the United Kingdom during which I began writing this
third edition.

xvii

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

Although relatively new to the scene of materials science, polymers have become
ubiquitous over the past century. In fact, since the Second World War, polymeric materials
represent the fastest growing segment of the U.S.’ chemical industry. It has been estimated
that more than a third of the chemical research dollar is spent on polymers, with a
correspondingly large proportion of technical personnel working in the area. From the
beginning, the study of polymers was an interdisciplinary science, with chemists, chemical
engineers, mechanical engineers, and materials scientists working to understand the
chemical structure and synthesis of polymers, develop methods to scale up and process
polymers, and evaluate the wide range of mechanical properties existing within the realm
of polymeric materials. The molecular structure of polymers is far more complex than the
molecules you may have studied in a general chemistry course: just compare the molecular
weights, H2O is 18, NaCl is about 58, but polymers have molecular weights from 10,000 to
tens of millions (or possibly much higher for cross-linked polymers). Many of the
structures you might have seen in a general cell biology course are made of polymers––proteins, polysaccharides, and DNA are all notable biological polymers. In a
material science course, you may have studied crystal structures in metals to understand
the mechanical behavior of different alloys (polymers can form crystals, too, but imagine
the difficulty of trying to line up a huge polymer molecule into a crystal structure).
Polymers are a unique class of materials having wide ranging applications.
A modern automobile contains over 300 lb (150 kg) of plastics, and this does not include
paints, the rubber in tires, or the fibers in tires and upholstery. Newer aircraft incorporate
increasing amounts of polymers and polymer-based composites. With the need to save fuel
and therefore weight, polymers will continue to replace traditional materials in the
automotive and aircraft industries. Similarly, the applications of polymers in the building
construction industry (piping, resilient flooring, siding, thermal and electrical insulation,
paints, decorative laminates) are already impressive and will become even more so in the
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
Ó 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

1

2

INTRODUCTION

future. A trip through your local supercenter will quickly convince anyone of the
importance of polymers in the packaging (bottles, films, trays), clothing (even cotton is
a polymer), and electronics industries. Many other examples from pharmaceutical coatings
to playground equipment could be cited, but to make a long story short, the use of polymers
now outstrips that of metals not just on a volume basis but also on a mass basis.
People have objected to synthetic polymers because they are not “natural.” Well,
botulism is natural, but it is not particularly desirable. Seriously, if all the polyester and
nylon fibers in use today were to be replaced by cotton and wool, their closest natural
counterparts, calculations show that there would not be enough arable land left to feed the
populace, and we would be overrun by sheep. The fact is that there simply are no practical
natural substitutes for many of the synthetic polymers used in modern society.
Since most modern polymers have their origins in petroleum, it has been argued that this
increased reliance on polymers constitutes an unnecessary drain on energy resources.
However, the raw materials for polymers account for less than 2% of total petroleum and
natural gas consumption, so even the total elimination of synthetic polymers would not
contribute significantly to the conservation of hydrocarbon resources. Furthermore, when
total energy costs (raw materials plus energy to manufacture and ship) are compared, the
polymeric item often comes out well ahead of its traditional counterpart, for example, glass
versus plastic beverage bottles. In addition, the manufacturing processes used to produce
polymers often generate considerably less environmental pollution than the processes used
to produce the traditional counterparts, for example, polyethylene film versus brown kraft
paper for packaging.
Ironically, one of the most valuable properties of polymers, their chemical inertness,
causes problems because polymers do not normally degrade in the environment. As a
result, they increasingly contribute to litter and the consumption of scarce landfill space.
One of the challenges in using polymers in materials is developing suitable methods for
recycle or effective methods to improve the degradation of disposable items.
Environmentally degradable polymers are being developed, although this is basically a
wasteful approach and we are not yet sure of the impact of the degradation products.
Burning polymer waste for its fuel value makes more sense, because the polymers retain
essentially the same heating value as the raw hydrocarbons from which they were made.
Still, the polymers must be collected and this approach wastes the value added in
manufacturing the polymers.
This ultimate solution is recycling. If waste polymers are to be recycled, they must first be
collected. Unfortunately, there are literally dozens (maybe hundreds) of different polymers in
the waste mix, and mixed polymers have mechanical properties similar to Cheddar cheese.
Thus, for anything but the least- demanding applications (e.g., parking bumpers, flower pots),
the waste mix must be separated prior to recycling. To this end, several automobile
manufacturers have standardized plastics used in cars that can be easily removed, remolded,
and reused in newer models. Another identifier helpful in recycling plastics is obvious if you
have ever looked at the bottom of a plastic soda bottle; there are molded-in numbers on most
of the large volume commodity plastics, allowing hand sorting of different materials.
Processes have been developed to separate the mixed plastics in the waste. The simplest
of these is a sink–float scheme that takes advantage of density differences among various
plastics. Unfortunately, many plastic items are foamed, plated, or filled (mixed with
nonpolymer components), which complicates density-based separations. Other separation
processes are based on solubility differences between various polymers. An intermediate
approach chemically degrades the waste polymer to the starting materials from which new

INTRODUCTION

3

polymer can be made. Other efforts related to polymeric waste have focused on reducing
the seemingly infinite lifetime of many plastics in the environment by developing
biodegradable commodity polymers.
There are five major areas of application for polymers: (1) plastics, (2) rubbers or
elastomers, (3) fibers, (4) surface finishes and protective coatings, and (5) adhesives.
Despite the fact that all five applications are based on polymers, and in many cases the same
polymer is used in two or more, the industries pretty much grew up separately. It was only
after Dr. Harmann Staudinger [1,2] proposed the “macromolecular hypothesis” in the
1920s explaining the common molecular makeup of these materials (for which he won the
1953 Nobel Prize in chemistry in belated recognition of the importance of his work) that
polymer science began to evolve from the independent technologies. Thus, a sound
fundamental basis was established for continued technological advances. The history of
polymer science is treated in detail elsewhere [3,4].
Economic considerations alone would be sufficient to justify the impressive scientific
and technological efforts expended on polymers in the past several decades. In addition,
however, this class of materials possesses many interesting and useful properties completely different from those of the more traditional engineering materials and that cannot be
explained or handled in design situations by the traditional approaches. A description of
three simple experiments should make this obvious.
1. Silly putty, a silicone polymer, bounces like rubber when rolled into a ball and
dropped. On the other hand, if the ball is placed on a table, it will gradually spread to
a puddle. The material behaves as an elastic solid under certain conditions and as a
viscous liquid under others.
2. If a weight is suspended from a rubber band, and the band is then heated (taking care
not to burn it), the rubber band will contract appreciably. All materials other than
polymers will undergo thermal expansion upon heating (assuming that no phase
transformation has occurred over the temperature range).
3. When a rotating rod is immersed in a molten polymer or a fairly concentrated
polymer solution, the liquid will actually climb up the rod. This phenomenon, the
Weissenberg effect, is contrary to what is observed in nonpolymer liquids, which
develop a curved surface profile with a lowest point at the rod, as the material is flung
outward by centrifugal force.
Although such behavior is unusual in terms of the more familiar materials, it is a perfectly
logical consequence of the molecular structure of polymers. This molecular structure is the
key to an understanding of the science and technology of polymers and will underlie the
chapters to follow.
Figure 1.1 illustrates the followings questions to be considered:
1. How is the desired molecular structure obtained?
2. How do the polymer’s processing (i.e., formability) properties depend on its
molecular structure?
3. How do its material properties (mechanical, chemical, optical, etc.) depend on
molecular structure?
4. How do material properties depend on a polymer’s processing history?
5. How do its applications depend on its material properties?

4

INTRODUCTION

FIGURE 1.1

The key role of molecular structure in polymer science and technology.

N

– O–

Cl–

F–

H–

– –

– –

– C–

–

– –

The word polymer comes from the Greek word meaning “many- membered.” Strictly
speaking, it could be applied to any large molecule formed from a relatively large number
of smaller units or “mers,” for example, a sodium chloride crystal, but it is most commonly
(and exclusively, here) restricted to materials in which the mers are held together by
covalent bonding, that is, shared electrons. For our purposes, only a few bond valences need
be remembered:
– Si–

It is always a good idea to “count the bonds” in any structure written to make sure they
conform to the above.
Example 1.1 Carbon is the most common element in polymers. Why?
Solution. To make a polymer, the atoms that make up the repeat units must be capable of
forming at least two bonds, so H, F, and Cl would terminate a polymer, and can be only on
the ends or in functional groups on the sides of the polymer. Two bonds are enough for
bonding to occur to continue a polymer structure, but using only oxygen (OOO. . .)
would not provide any functionality. C and Si both can make four bonds, and since most
polymers are derived from petroleum sources, carbon is found in the vast majority of
polymers. The four bonds allow two to be used to form the backbone (CCC. . .), but the
remaining two can be used to include different functional groups, which give polymers
their unique characteristics.

The basic structure of a polymer consists of a backbone and pendant (or side) groups
(Figure 1.2). Atoms that are covalently linked and stretch from one end of a polymer to the
other make up the polymer backbone (which is often not only carbon, but can also contain
other atoms such as N, O, or Si). All other atoms are part of the side groups (H is the
simplest, methyl (CH3) or alcohol (OH) groups are among many possibilities, making
for a wide variety of structures that make up polymers). Polymers are named based on the
repeat unit since that can describe a rather lengthy molecule in a succinct way.
Because carbon is so versatile and can form the backbone of a polymer while being
covalently attached to two other side groups, some basic organic chemistry will help to
understand the molecular structure of polymers. While organic chemistry is not a prerequisite
for learning about polymers, some basic terminology related to organic functional groups
will help in understanding molecular structures and polymerization reactions.

INTRODUCTION

Polypropylene
repeat unit

5

A segment of polypropylene with
five repeat units drawn out

(CH2 CH)

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

CH3

(C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C)

H

CH3 H

CH3 H

CH3 H

CH3 H

CH3

FIGURE 1.2 Structure of a typical polymer polypropylene is shown here, with an all-carbon
backbone and side groups of H or CH3. Note that fixed bond angles make the three-dimensional
structure more complex than shown here.

Organic chemicals can be categorized based on common functional groups (types of
bonds) that are found within a structure (Figure 1.3). These functionalities are helpful in
determining if a molecule might be reactive, whether it is likely to be hydrophilic (or
hydrophobic), and how (or if) a molecule can participate in a polymerization reaction.
Alcohols (OH) are perhaps one of the more familiar functional groups, and they can be
reacted with carboxylic acids (COOH) to form an ester bond. As long as each molecule
has at least two reactive functional groups (e.g., a dialcohol (more commonly referred to as
a diol) and a dicarboxylic acid (a diacid) can react to form a continuous polymer molecule
with multiple ester linkages along the polymer backbone, yielding a polyester!). Alcohols
can also be found in the side groups of polymers, as in poly(vinyl alcohol), where the OH
group stays intact after the reaction.
Polyester: two repeat units
O
O
||
||
–[–(CH2)4–C–O–(CH2)4–C–O–]–
Polyester backbone atoms
C–C–C–C–C–O–C–C–C–C–C–O

Poly(vinyl alcohol): two repeat units
–[–CH2–CH–CH2–(CH–]–
|

|

OH

OH

Poly(vinyl alcohol) backbone atoms
C–C–C–C

Note that the hydrogens written alongside carbons are not part of the backbone of a
polymer molecule. They can bond only to one other atom (the carbon), so a more accurate
drawing would show the hydrogens off to the side of the backbone, just as the OH group
is in the poly(vinyl alcohol).
Some of the organic functional groups that are reactive to form polymers include
alcohols, amines, carboxylic acids, and alkenes. Although alkanes (CC bonds) are
common in polymers, both in the backbone and in the side groups, they are not reactive.
Other bonds commonly found in polymers include amides (for nylons), esters, carbonates,
imides, and urethanes. Of this last set, even those who have had organic chemistry probably
have not run across the last three, as they are more common in polymers than in traditional
organic chemistry. Further reviews of organic chemistry functional groups are also
available, and many others can be found online [5,6].
While there is no simple rule about the structures found in a polymer, the most common
polymers have only a few organic functional groups, that repeat over and over to make the
macromolecules. Of the groups shown in Figure 1.3, alkanes, esters, urethanes, carbonates,
aryls, silanes, amides, and imides are commonly found in the backbone of polymers.
Alcohols, carboxylic acids, and amines are either reactive parts of monomers or can be
found in polymer side groups.

6

INTRODUCTION

FIGURE 1.3 Common organic functional groups (note: R1 and R2 stand for general organic
molecules that continue the molecule away from the functional group).

Also keep in mind that when the covalently bound atoms differ in electronegativity, the
electrons are not shared evenly between them. In gaseous HCl, for example, the electrons
cluster around the electronegative chlorine atom, giving rise to a molecular dipole:
H

Cl

+

d-

d

Electrostatic forces between such dipoles can play an important role in determining
polymer properties, as can be imagined for polymers containing the electronegative
oxygen, nitrogen, chlorine, or fluorine atoms (which are generally d). These atoms pull
the electrons away from other atoms they are covalently attached to (often carbons),
making the carbon atom somewhat positive (dþ).

REFERENCES

7

The most important constituents of living organisms, cellulose and proteins, are
naturally occurring polymers (as is DNA), but most commercially important polymers
are synthetic or modified natural polymers.
PROBLEMS
1

Consider the room you are in while doing your homework (dorm room, library,
cafeteria, pub., and so on).
(a) Identify five items in it that are made of polymers.
(b) What would you make those items of if there were no polymers?
(c) Why do you suppose polymers were chosen over competing materials (if any)
for each particular application?

2

Consider the plastic used in the construction of an automobile. List four different
parts of a car that may be made of a polymer (consider the exterior, under the hood,
and interior of the car––there are many more than four!). For each part, list two
physical or chemical properties important for that part. For example, for plastic cup
holders, the polymer must be moldable to form into correct shape and should not
turn rubbery when heated to 150 F (if exposed to the sun or a hot cup of coffee).

3

You wish to develop a polymer to replace glass in window glazing. What properties
must a polymer have for that application?

4

Vinyl chloride is the monomer from which the commercially important polymer poly
(vinyl chloride), PVC, is made. It has the chemical formula C2H3Cl. Show the structure
of vinyl chloride and identify any dipoles present.

5

Acrylonitrile monomer, C3H3N, is an important constituent of acrylic fibers and nitrile
rubber. It does not have a cyclic structure and it has only one double bond.
(a) Show the structure of acrylonitrile and identify any dipoles present.
(b) Draw the repeating structure of polyacrylonitrile, ignore end groups.

6

Poly(octyl cyanoacrylate) is an important adhesive. With the help of the Internet, draw
the repeating structure for this polymer, show any dipoles present, and find one
trademarked product made from poly(octyl cyanoacrylate).

7

Propylene (C3H6) is the monomer from which the fastest growing plastic, polypropylene,
is made. It contains one double bond. Show its structure and identify any dipoles present.

REFERENCES
[1] Staudinger, H., Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. 53, 1073 (1920).
[2] Staudinger, H. and J. Fritsch, Helv. Chim. Acta 5, 778 (1922).
[3] Morawetz, H., Polymers: The Origins and Growth of a Science, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1985.
[4] Stahl, G.A., CHEMTECH, August 1984, 492.
[5] Richardson, P.N. and R.C. Kierstead, SPE J. 25(9), 54 (1969).
[6] Leach, M.R., Organic Functional Groups, on website Chemistry Tutorials and Drills, www.
chemistry-drills.com/functional-groups.php?q¼simple, 2009.

PART I

POLYMER FUNDAMENTALS

This part covers the fundamental building blocks, basic structures, and nomenclature for
polymers. To start, we need to know a little about the molecular organization of polymers,
how they are named, and some of the important techniques to characterize polymeric
materials. Part I also covers some of the unique thermal, solution, and optical properties of
polymers.
Some of the key points to learn from this part of the book are the following:
Polymers are huge––molecular weights of 1,000,000 are not uncommon.
Building polymers requires reactive organic functional groups.
Polymers twist and turn, leave space open like a sponge, but can also crystallize.
Determining a polymer’s molecular weight is complicated, but important.
Polymer structure and organization determines whether the material can crystallize.
Why some polymers are transparent but others are opaque.
Besides melting points, polymers have another important thermal transition: the
glass transition temperature.
In a good solvent, a polymer can dissolve, but even at low concentrations, the
solution quickly becomes viscous.

Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
Ó 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

9

CHAPTER 2

TYPES OF POLYMERS

The large number of natural and synthetic polymers has been classified in several ways:
thermal behavior, route of chemical synthesis, and structural organization. These will be
outlined below, and in the process many terms important in polymer science and
technology will be introduced.
2.1

REACTION TO TEMPERATURE

The earliest distinction between types of polymers was made long before any concrete
knowledge of their molecular structure. It was a purely phenomenological distinction based
on their reaction to heating and cooling.
2.1.1

Thermoplastics

It was noted that certain polymers would soften upon heating and could then be made to
flow when a stress was applied. When cooled again, they would reversibly regain their solid
or rubbery nature. These polymers are known as thermoplastics. By analogy, ice and
solder, though not polymers, behave as thermoplastics.
Some of the most commercially important thermoplastics include polyethylene (PE),
polypropylene (PP), poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC), and polystyrene (PS). PE is used in
products ranging from plastic bags to detergent bottles and has the simplest possible repeat
structure of any polymer, since all the pendant groups are hydrogens. PP is also found in a
wide range of products, such as plastic storage containers, and competes with other
polymers in making plastic bags and pipes. PVC is commonly found in materials as diverse
as rigid drain pipes, shower curtains, and raincoats, while PS has been used in foam coffee
cups and disposable cutlery. Because these materials are thermoplastics, they are typically
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

11

12

TYPES OF POLYMERS

made into pellets after polymerization, and then can be melted and extruded or shaped into
final products.
2.1.2

Thermosets

Other polymers, although they might be heated to the point where they would soften and
could be made to flow under stress once, would not do so reversibly; that is, heating caused
them to undergo a “curing” reaction. Sometimes these materials emerge from the synthesis
reaction in a cured state. Further heating of these thermosetting polymers ultimately leads
only to degradation (as is sometimes attested to by the smell of a short-circuited electrical
appliance) and not softening and flow. Again by analogy, eggs and concrete behave as
thermosets. Continued heating of thermoplastics will also ultimately lead to degradation,
but they will generally soften at temperatures below their degradation point.
Commercially important thermosets include epoxies, polyesters, and phenolic resins.
Each of these materials starts out as (often viscous) liquids that set by curing into a final
shape. Because these materials set the first time they are made, they cannot be reheated
after the polymer is formed without degrading the structure.
Natural rubber is a classic example of the difference between a thermoplastic and a
thermoset. Introduced to Europe by Columbus, natural rubber did not achieve commercial
significance for centuries; because it was a thermoplastic, articles made of it would become
soft and sticky on hot days. In 1839, Charles Goodyear discovered the curing reaction with
sulfur (which he called vulcanization in honor of the Roman god of fire) that converted the
polymer to a thermoset. This allowed the rubber to maintain its useful properties to much
higher temperatures, which ultimately led to its great commercial importance.
2.2

CHEMISTRY OF SYNTHESIS

Pioneering workers in the field of polymer chemistry soon observed that they could
produce polymers by two familiar types of organic reactions: condensation and addition.
As monomers react, new structures are created during the polymerization:
- dimers (or 2-mers): the combination of two monomers,
- trimers (or 3-mers): three monomers strung together, and other #-mers, with the
number related to the degree of polymerization, and
- oligomers (or a few mers): 10–20 or so repeat units along a backbone.
An oligomer is simply a small polymer, but it has unique properties since it has a small
number of repeat units. Eventually, enough reactions take place to form a large polymer,
where it is not uncommon to have thousands or tens of thousands of repeat units connected
along a single polymer backbone. In the formation from monomer to polymer, the basic
repeat unit remains the same, but the material changes from a monomer that is liquid (or
even a gas) to oligomers that may be highly viscous liquids to solid polymers.
Several elementary organic functional groups are worth reviewing, as they play
important roles in the synthesis of polymers (Figure 1.3). Because the chemical structures
resulting from condensation and addition polymerizations are a bit different, the method of
polymerization is one of the major distinctions used in describing polymers. Note that
certain functional groups are reactive for forming polymers (common ones include alkenes,

CHEMISTRY OF SYNTHESIS

13

alcohols, carboxylic acids, and amines), while others are more commonly found in the
resulting structures (alkanes, amides, esters, imides, and urethanes). Other functional
groups may not participate in reactions, but be present as side groups or within the polymer
backbone (e.g., aryl groups, and ethers).
2.2.1

Condensation Polymerization

Polymers formed from a typical organic condensation reaction, in which a small molecule
(most often water) is split out, are known, logically enough, as condensation polymers. The
common esterification reaction of an organic acid and an organic base (an alcohol in this
case) illustrates the simple “lasso chemistry” involved:
O

O

R– O H + HO –C–R¢ → R–O–C–R¢ + H2O
Alcohol + Acid

→ Ester

The OH group on the alcohol and the

O

on the acid are known as functional groups,

HO–C–

those parts of a molecule that participate in a reaction, while R and R0 are abbreviations that
represent the remainder of the molecule––they are generic organic groups and will
commonly be used in organic chemistry. Of course, the ester formed in the preceding
reaction is not a polymer because we have hooked up only two small molecules, and the
reaction is finished far short of anything that might be considered “many membered.”
At this point, it is useful to introduce the concept of monomer functionality. Functionality
is the number of bonds a mer can form with the other mers in a reaction. In condensation
polymerization, it is equal to the number of (organic) functional groups on the mer. These
groups must be reactive (such as carboxylic acids, alcohols, aldehydes, or amines).
In the above example, the reactants are monofunctional (there is one alcohol group on
one reactant and one carboxylic acid group on the other); thus, if there are no other
functional groups present in the rest of the molecule (the R group), the reaction will form
only one new bond (an ester). Consider, though, what happens if both reactants are
difunctional and the reaction progresses at each end.
O

O

O

O

x HO–R– OH + x HO–C–R¢–C–OH → H –[ O–R–O–C–R¢–C ]–x ΟΗ
+ (2x – 1) H2O
Diol

Diacid

Polyester

Here, the resulting product molecule is still difunctional (an alcohol on the left end and
an acid on the right; the ester bonds,

O

, are not reactive for polymerization). So,

R–O–C–R¢

the left end of the molecule can react with another diacid molecule and its right end with
another diol molecule. At each step, the growing molecule remains difunctional, so the
reaction can continue until all alcohol and acid groups in the reaction mixture are added
together (this includes the possibility that two larger molecules can react). Once enough of
these molecules (hundreds to even millions of “mers”) have condensed together, a polymer
is created.

14

TYPES OF POLYMERS

2.2.1.1 Polyesters In general, the polycondensation of x molecules of a diol with x
molecules of a diacid to give a polyester molecule is written as in the reaction above.
In the polyester (many ester “mers”) molecule, the structure in brackets is the repeating
unit, and this is what distinguishes one polymer from another. The

O
(–O–C)–

linkage

characterizes all polyesters. The generalized organic groups R and R0 may vary widely
(with a consequent variation in the properties of the polymer), but as long as the repeating
unit contains the

O
(–O–C)–

ester linkage, the polymer is a polyester. Of course, there are other

functional groups that can react, and thus there are many different types of condensation
polymers (polyamides, polyimides, polyethers, etc.).
The quantity x is the degree of polymerization, the number of repeating units strung
together as identical beads in the polymer chain. It is sometimes also called the chain
length, but it is a pure number, not a measurable length.
The above nomenclature was introduced by Wallace Hume Carothers, who, with his
group at Du Pont, invented two important polymers, neoprene (an addition polymer) and
nylon, in the 1930s and was one of the founders of modern polymer science [1].
2.2.1.2 Polyamides (Nylons) Another functional group that is capable of taking
part in a condensation polymerization is the amine (NH2) group, where one hydrogen
from this group reacts with a carboxylic acid in a manner similar to the alcoholic hydrogen
to form a polyamide (commonly known as nylon):
H

H

O

O

H

H O

O

x H–N–R–Ν–H + x HO–C–R¢–C–OH → H –[ N–R–N– C–R¢–C ]–x ΟΗ
+ (2x – 1) H2O
Diamine

The

H O
R–N–C–R¢

Diacid

Polyamide or nylon

linkage is characteristic of all nylons. This bond is also commonly

referred to as a peptide bond when it connects two amino acids. Proteins are made from
polypeptides, which are one type of natural polymers, and are discussed later.
2.2.1.3 Polyimides Polyimides are actually a subset of polyamides, but forms when
both carboxylic acid groups in diacid monomer react with an amine. As shown, a benzene
ring with two acid groups on adjacent carbons (in the ortho position) condenses with an
amine to form a single bond. The result is an imide linkage.
O

O
–R1

–C–OH
–C–OH
O

+

H2N–R2

→

C
–R1

N–R2

+

2 H2O

C
O

Compare the functionality of the diacid in this reaction versus the polyamides or
polyesters. Here, the diacid acts as a monofunctional group, while when forming polyamides or polyesters, the diacid reacts separately on both ends. For the formation of a

CHEMISTRY OF SYNTHESIS

15

polyimide, the carboxylic acid groups must be close together. Of course, this forms only a
single bond. To form a polyimide, there needs to be another diacid as part of the R1
functional group and another amine in the R2 group.
2.2.1.4 Polyurethanes Polyurethanes are made by the reaction of a molecule with
two isocyanate groups (a diisocyanate) and two alcohols (a diol). In this reaction, the
hydrogen from the alcohol is transferred to the nitrogen atom of the isocyanate group, and a
new bond is formed between the isocyanate carbon and the alcohol oxygen.
OH
HO–R2–OH
Diol

+

→

O=C=N–R1–N=C=O
Diisocyanate

HO–(–R1–O–C–N–R2–)–N=C=O
Polyurethane

As observed for the polyesters, polyamides, and polyimides, polyurethanes also have a
characteristic bond, (OCN), in their backbone (with the carbon having a ¼O) that
makes these polymers easily identifiable. Note that after the reaction to form a urethane
bond, the end groups (an alcohol and an isocyanate) are still available to grow the polymer
chain further.
2.2.1.5 Polycarbonates One additional group of condensation polymers highly
important in industry is polycarbonates. Polycarbonates are a special subcase of polyesters,
in that one monomer has only a single carbon, resulting in the characteristic linkage:
O
O–C–O

A common reaction to produce polycarbonates involves a diol (bisphenol-A) and
phosgene, which is a diacid chloride (with functionality similar to a dicarboxylic acid) (see
part N in Example 2.4).
2.2.1.6 Monomers with Tri- (or Higher) Functionality The above examples are
for polymers formed from difunctional reactants. If either reactant has only one functional
group, no polymer can result. However, monomers with functionalities higher than two are
also used to make polymers. For example, glycerin is a trifunctional molecule (three
alcohol groups) that can be used in polyesterification. Molecules with three or more
functional groups tend to make network (or cross-linked) polymers, as the reaction can
proceed to form a three-dimensional network instead of just a linear polymer as
difunctional monomers do.
HH H
H–C–C–C–H
OO O
HH H

2.2.1.7 Monomers with Two Different Functional Groups It is possible that
the starting molecule for a condensation polymerization has two (or more) different
functional groups and does not require the presence of two different monomers. Two

16

TYPES OF POLYMERS

examples of such monomers are amino acids and hydroxy acids:
H

O

O

N–R–C–OH

HO–R–C–OH

Amino acid

Hydroxy acid

H

Of course, most of us have heard of amino acids in biology classes, as these are the
building blocks for polypeptides, which are given the “poly” prefix because they are
polymers of amino acids. Multiple polypeptides make up the structure of proteins. An
amino acid can react with another amino acid to form an amide bond (or peptide bond if it is
an a amino acid) because they have both an amine functional group and a carboxylic acid
functional group. Similarly, hydroxy acids condense to form polyesters. However, these
reactions may not always proceed in a straightforward fashion. If the R group is large
enough, it is possible that the molecule becomes configured so that it can “bite its own tail,”
condensing to form a cyclic structure rather than a polymer.
O
H

O

H–N–R–C–OH

R

C

+ H2O

N–H
Amino acid

Lactam

This cyclic compound can then undergo a ring-scission polymerization, in which the
polymer is formed without splitting out a small molecule (e.g., water), because the small
molecule had been eliminated previously in the cyclization step.
O
xR

C
N–H

H

O

–[ N–R–C ]–x
Polyamide

Despite the lack of elimination of a small molecule in the actual polymerization step, the
products can be thought of as having been formed by a direct condensation from the
monomer and are usually considered condensation polymers. Also of note is that not all
condensation polymerizations yield water as the by-product, sometimes carboxylic acids
are formed into acid chlorides (with the functional OH group replaced by a chlorine
atom), so instead of an OH leaving group, a Cl group leaves, resulting in HCl as the
“condensation” by-product.
Note that in this case, the characteristic nylon linkage,

H O

, is split up in the above

(–N–C )–

reaction, and not immediately obvious in the repeating unit as written. If you place a second
repeating unit next to the one shown, it becomes evident. This illustrates the somewhat
arbitrary location of the brackets, which should not obscure the fact that the polymer is a nylon
(though the structure inside the brackets is the repeating “mer”). One important difference
between typical synthetic polymers and biological polypeptides is that in most synthetic
polymers, the R group is the same throughout the polymer, whereas polypeptides are made up
of a sequence of 20 different amino acids (as coded by DNA), each with a unique R group.
Though not formed from a monomer with two different functional groups, another
important class of natural polymers is polysaccharides (literally poly sugars). The most
common monomer here is glucose (C6H12O6), and when bonded together by glycosidic
linkages (a condensation reaction), it forms starch, cellulose, and other polymers that are

CHEMISTRY OF SYNTHESIS

17

important for structural rigidity (particularly in plants) and energy storage in living
organisms, as most starches can be broken down (depolymerized) easily.
2.2.2

Addition Polymerization

The second polymer formation reaction is known as addition polymerization and its
products as addition (or chain or free radical) polymers. Addition polymerizations have
two distinct characteristics:
1. No molecule is split out; hence, the repeat unit has the same chemical formula as the
monomer.
2. The polymerization reaction involves the opening of a double bond.1
Monomers of the general type C=C undergo addition polymerization as
x C= C → –[ C – C]–x

The double bond “opens up,” forming bonds to other monomers at each end, so a
carbon–carbon double bond is difunctional according to our general definition. (Note that a
monomer with two double bonds has a functionality of four; this type of monomer is often
referred to as a cross-linking agent as it results in the formation of network structures.) The
question of what happens at the ends of addition polymers will be deferred until we reach
Chapter 9 on polymerization mechanisms. Also, note that carbon–oxygen double bonds,
while common in monomers and polymers, are stable and unreactive for addition
polymerization.
An important subclass of the double bond containing monomers is the vinyl monomer:
H H
C= C
H X

Addition polymerization is occasionally referred to as vinyl polymerization. Table 2.1
lists some commercially important vinyl monomers, with different substituents replacing X.
TABLE 2.1 Some Commercially Important Vinyl
Monomers

1

Monomer

X

Ethylene
Styrene

H

Vinyl chloride
Propylene
Acrylonitrile

Cl
CH3
–C≡N

Although aromatic rings are often symbolized by
, this is a poor representation of resonance-stabilized
to
structures, which are completely inert to addition polymerization. They are more properly symbolized by
avoid confusion with the ordinary double bond. To save space in this book, we will sometimes also use f to
represent the aromatic (or phenyl) ring.

18

TYPES OF POLYMERS

Example 2.1 Lactic acid can be dehydrated to form acrylic acid according to the following
reaction:
H3C O

H H O

HO–C–C–OH
H

→

C = C–O–OH + H2O
H

Lactic acid

Acrylic acid

Both these acids can be used as monomers for polymerization. Write the structural
formulas for the repeating units for each of the polymers that would be formed if starting
from (A) lactic acid and (B) acrylic acid.
Solution. Lactic acid is a hydroxy acid having OH and COOH functional groups. It will
form a condensation polymer by splitting out water to give
H3C O
H –[ O–C–C ]– x OH
H

As this is a monomer with two different functional groups, the structure in brackets
splits up the characteristic ester linkage.

Acrylic acid is a vinyl monomer with a double bond (since it has only one carboxylic acid,
it would not be useful in a condensation polymerization). It undergoes addition polymerization to form
H O
[– C–C ]–x
H C =O
OH

Interestingly, the ester linkage in poly(lactic acid), PLA, is easily hydrolyzed, breaking
down the polymer. Thus, this polymer has found applications in biodegradable plastics for
products ranging from food packaging to tissue engineering scaffolds for medical
applications. Poly(acrylic acid), or PAA, is not degradable, but the pendant carboxylic
acid group makes this polymer extremely hydrophilic and thus it is used as a superabsorbent (particularly important in diapers).
Although most molecules with two C¼C bonds (dialkenes or simply dienes) have a
functionality of 4 for addition polymerization, in conjugated dienes, the two double bonds
are separated by only one single CC bond, having a functionality of 2, so they form linear
polymers. A conjugated diene is a unique monomer for polymerization because (unlike
molecules where the double bonds that act as cross-linking agents are further separated) the
double bonds here act in the same way as a single double bond in vinyl polymerizations.
C = C–C = C
1 2 3 4

The addition polymerization of a conjugated diene results in an unsaturated polymer, or
a polymer that contains double bonds, either in the backbone of the polymer or in the
pendant group. Furthermore, conjugated diene polymerizations can result in several

STRUCTURE

19

structural isomers in the polymer. If the monomer is symmetrical with regard to substituent
groups on carbons one through four, it can undergo 1,2-addition and 1,4-addition. If the
monomer is asymmetrical, the 3,4 addition will result in yet another structural isomer. (For
symmetrical dienes, the 1,2 and 3,4 reactions result in the same structure.) This is
illustrated below for the addition polymerization of isoprene (2-methyl-1,3-butadiene),
an asymmetrical conjugated diene:
H CH3 H H
[–C—C= C—C]–x–
H
H CH3 H H
x C= C– C = C
H

H
Isoprene

1,4-Polyisoprene

H
H CH3

–[–C— C ]–x–

1,2-Polyisoprene

H C—H
H—C—H
H H
–[–C— C ]–x–

3,4-Polyisoprene

H C—CH3
H—C—H

Polyisoprene is an important flexible rubbery material, one of the first rubbers to be used
as it is found in nature (thus the alternate name “natural rubber”). It is used in belts and
hoses in automobiles, in laboratory gloves, and in rubber bands. The 1,2 and 3,4 reactions
are sometimes known as vinyl addition, because part of the diene monomer simply acts as
an X group in a vinyl monomer.
2.3

STRUCTURE

As an appreciation for the molecular structure of polymers was gained, three major
structural categories emerged. These are illustrated schematically in Figure 2.1.

Linear

Branched

Crosslinked

FIGURE 2.1

Schematic representation of polymer structures.

20

TYPES OF POLYMERS

2.3.1

Linear

If a polymer is built from strictly difunctional monomers, the result is a linear polymer
chain. A scale model of a typical linear polymer molecule made from 0.5 cm diameter
clothesline rope would be about 3 m long. This is not a bad analogy: the chains are long,
flexible, and essentially one-dimensional structures. The term linear can be somewhat
misleading, however, because the molecules do not necessarily assume a geometrically
linear conformation as shown in the figure. Some of the better analogies for what these
macromolecules look like is a bowl of spaghetti or tangled strands of yarn. The
nomenclature for homopolymers usually simply puts “poly” before the name of the
repeat unit, which is particularly simple for most addition polymers, such as in
polystyrene. If the repeat unit has more than one word, parentheses are used to indicate
what is repeated, such as in poly(vinyl chloride). Many condensation polymers would
have fairly complex names using this rule, so most are simply referred to by their class
(e.g., a polyester) or by their trade names (Dacron , Nylon , Lexan , etc.).
2.3.1.1 Random Copolymers Polymers consisting of chains that contain a single
repeating unit are known as homopolymers (this includes many polymers made by addition
and condensation polymerization). If, however, the chains contain a random arrangement
of two separate and distinct repeating units, the polymer is known as a random or statistical
copolymer, or simply copolymer. A random copolymer might be formed by the addition
polymerization of a mixture of two different vinyl monomers A and B (the degree of
“randomness” depends on the relative amounts and reactivities of A and B, as we shall see
later) and can be represented as
AABAAABBABAAB
and called poly(A-co-B), where the first repeating unit listed is the one present in the greater
amount. For example, a random synthetic rubber copolymer of 75% butadiene and 25%
styrene would be termed poly(butadiene-co-styrene). Of course, ter- (3-) and higher
multipolymers are possible: nature makes a regular tetrapolymer (RNA and DNA, which
are complex polymers with four bases arranged according to genetic codes) and polypeptides
that are copolymers with 20 different repeat units (amino acids).
It must be emphasized that the products of condensation polymerizations that require
two different monomers to provide the necessary functional groups, for example, a diacid
and a diamine, are not copolymers because they contain a single repeating unit. If, however,
two different diamines were used in the polymerization, there would be two distinct
repeating units and this could be correctly termed a copolymer.
Example 2.2 Illustrate the repeating units that result when 3 mol of hexamethylene
diamine (I) are condensed with 2 mol of adipic acid (II) and 1 mol of sebacic acid (III)
and name the resulting copolymer
O

O

O

H2N —冢 CH2 —
冣 NH2 HO–C —冢 CH2 —
冣 C–OH
6

4

(I)

O

HO–C —冢 CH2 —
冣 C–OH
8

(II)

(III)

Solution. The two repeating units are
H

H O

O

H

H O

O

–[ N—冢 CH2 冣— N–C —冢 CH2 冣— C]– and [–N—冢 CH2 冣— N–C —冢 CH2 冣— C ]–
6

From (I) and (II)

4

6

From (I) and (III)

8

STRUCTURE

21

The formal (if rather complicated) name for the copolymer containing these two
repeating units is poly(hexamethylene adipamide-co-hexamethylene sebacamide). Even
the linear homopolymer poly(hexamethylene adipamide) is a rather cumbersome name,
and thus it is more commonly referred to as nylon 6,6, with the sixes representing the
number of carbons in each of the monomers.
2.3.1.2 Block Copolymers Under certain conditions, linear chains can be formed
that contain long contiguous blocks of two (or more) repeating units combined in the chains
termed a block copolymer.
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAABBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
AAAAAAAAAAAAAABBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
These structures are called a diblock copolymer, poly(A-b-B), and a triblock copolymer,
poly(A-b-B-b-A), respectively. Here, the b (meaning “block”) replaces “co” to indicate the
organized structure. These structures are important for nanotechnology as several block
copolymers can self-assemble into nanospherical micelles, with the A and B blocks
arranged to form the core and shell (Figure 2.2). This works especially well if the A and B
groups have opposite polarities, so they prefer to segregate rather than intermingle.
2.3.2

Branched

If a few molecules of tri (or higher) functionality are introduced (intentionally or through
side reactions) to the reaction, the resulting polymer will have a branched structure. One
such example is the grafting of branches made from repeating unit “B” to a linear backbone

FIGURE 2.2
A groups.

Block copolymers self-assembling into a micelle with core of B groups and corona of

22

TYPES OF POLYMERS

of A repeating units. Here, B is said to be grafted onto A:
B
BB
BB
B
B
B
AAAA-------- A------A
B
BB

This graft copolymer would be termed poly(A-g-B), as the backbone repeat unit is listed
first. Note that “few molecules” is key here, since if even as little as 0.1% of the reaction
mixture contains monomers with functionalities of 3 or higher, a network or cross-linked
structure is likely to form (particularly at higher reaction conversions).
2.3.3

Cross Linked or Network

As the length and frequency of the branches on polymer chains increase, the probability
that the branches will ultimately reach from one backbone chain to another increases.
When the backbone chains are connected in this way, the molecular structure becomes
a network, with all the chains linked through covalent bonds. This creates a threedimensional cross-linked polymer and the entire mass of the polymer becomes one single
tremendously large molecule! One impressive example is a bowling ball, which is a crosslinked polymer, so the entire mass is one molecule; it has a molecular weight on the order of
1027 g/mol. Remember this the next time someone suggests that individual molecules are
too small to be seen with the naked eye.
Cross-linked or network polymers may be formed in two ways: (1) by starting with
reaction masses containing sufficient amounts of tri- or higher functional monomer, or
(2) by chemically creating cross-links between previously formed linear or branched
molecules (“curing”). The latter is precisely what vulcanization does to natural rubber, and
this fact serves to introduce the connection between the phenomenological “reaction to
temperature” classification and the more fundamental concept of molecular structure. This
important connection will be clarified through a discussion of bonding in polymers.

H H

H

(I)

H

C–C

=

H H

O

C–C

=

HO–C–C–OH

=

Example 2.3 Show (a) how a linear, unsaturated polyester is produced from ethylene
glycol (I) and maleic anhydride (II), and (b) how the linear, unsaturated polyester is crosslinked with a vinyl monomer such as styrene.

O
O

(II)

O

C–C

=

H

=

Solution. First, realize that an acid anhydride is simply a diacid with a mole of water split
out from the two acid groups. (This is the only common example of acid groups condensing
with one another. You cannot ordinarily form polymers this way.) When considering the
reaction of an acid anhydride, (conceptually) hydrate it back to the diacid:

=

H

C–C

O + H2O
O

Maleic anhydride

O

O

HO–C–C = C–C–OH
H H
Maleic acid

STRUCTURE

23

Then condense the diacid with the diol to form a polyester with one double bond per
repeating unit:
H H

O

O

HO–C–C–OH + HO–C–C= C–C–OH
H H

H H
H H

O H H O

H –[ O–C–C–O–C–C= C–C ]–x OH
H H

The double bond in the maleic acid is inert toward condensation polymerization. Note
that the degree of unsaturation (average number of double bonds per repeating unit) could
be varied from zero to one (as it is here) by employing mixtures of a saturated diacid, for
example, phthalic anhydride (III), and the maleic anhydride to form copolyesters with
saturated and unsaturated repeating units:
=

O
C

O
=

C

O
(III)

]z

Commercially, the degree of polymerization x is maintained low (say 8–10 repeat units) so that
the product is a viscous liquid. The linear, unsaturated polyester is then diluted with a liquid
vinyl monomer, most often styrene. Before use, an initiator chemical that promotes addition
polymerization (as discussed in Chapter 10) is added, causing the vinyl monomer to undergo
addition copolymerization with the double bonds in the polyester (which has a functionality of
16–20, twice the number of double bonds). This forms a highly cross-linked rigid network.
H–C–
H–CH

Styrene

]x

H H
C=C
H

[

Unsaturated
linear chains

+

[

H H
C=C
H H
C=C

]y

[

H
C—C
H
HCH
HC–
H
C–C
H
HC– H
HC–
Network structure

The liquid polyester–styrene mixture is often used to impregnate fiberglass and is cured
to form boat hulls, auto (Corvette) bodies, and other so-called fiberglass objects (which are
really composite materials of fiberglass reinforced polyester).
Example 2.4 Given the structure of the monomer(s) for the polymers, show the structural
formulas of the repeating units for each of the following polymers and classify them
according to structure and chemistry of formation. All these polymers are commercially
important. Most follow the rules outlined above, but some do not, and have been included

24

TYPES OF POLYMERS

here to illustrate their structures, chemistries of formation, and characteristic linkages. The
polymer name and starting monomers are shown in the table below:
Part Polymer Name
A Polystyrene

Monomer Structure(s)
H–C=CH2

Styrene

B Polyethylene

H2 C ¼ CH2
Ethylene

=

HO–C

Butylene glycol
(1,4 -butanediol)

H3C–O–C
O

O

=

O

C–OH

Terephthalic acid

C–O–CH3
O

HO—(CH2 )—
OH
2

=

Ethylene glycol

Dimethyl terephthalate

Hexamethylene diamine

O

O

=

H2N—(CH2 )—
NH2
6

=

D Poly(ethylene
terephthalate)
(PET) (Dacron,
Mylar )
E Nylon 6/6 (the
numbers designate
carbon atoms in the
diamine and diacid,
respectively)
F Nylon 6 (made
from a single
monomer)

HO—(CH2 )—
OH
4

=

C Poly(butylene
terephthalate)
(PBT)

HO–C—(CH2 )—
C–OH
4
Adipic acid

H2C

H2
C
C=O
N–H

H2C

C–— C
H2
H2
e -Caprolactam

=

O

H
H2C–C–CH2
O O O
H H H

C
C

O

=

G Glyptal
(glycerol þ
phthalic
anhydride)

O

Glycerol

Phthalic anhydride

H Poly(diallyl
phthalate)

O
H H H
C–O–C–C=C
H
H
H
H
C–O–C–C=C
O
H H H
Diallyl phthalate

H2N

C

N

N

C–NH2
N

C
NH2
Melamine

H–C–H
=

I Melamineformaldehyde
(Melmac ,
Formica )

O

Formaldehyde

STRUCTURE

Part Polymer Name
J Polytetrafluoroethylene
(Teflon TFE )
K Poly(phenylene
oxide) (PPO)
(Hint: polymerized
in presence of O2)

25

Monomer Structure(s)
F2 C ¼ CF2
Tetrafluoroethylene

CH3
HO
CH3
2,6-Dimethyl phenol

L Polypropylene

M Acetal (polyformaldehyde or
polyoxymethylene)
(Celcon ,
Delrin )
N Polycarbonate
(Calibre , Lexan,
Makrolon )

H
H2C=C
CH3
Propylene

H–C–H
O

H2C
or O

Formaldehyde

O
C
H2

CH2
O

Trioxane

CH3
C

HO

Cl–C –Cl
OH

O
Phosgene

CH3
Bisphenol-A

O Epoxy or phenoxy

CH3
HO

P Poly(dimethyl
siloxane)
(silicone rubber)
(Hint: polymerized
in presence
of H2O)

H H
OH

C
CH3

H2C–C–C–Cl
O H

Bisphenol-A

Epichlorohydrin

CH3
Cl– Si–Cl
CH3
Dimethyl dichlorosilane

Q Polyurethane

0

O ¼ C ¼ NR N ¼ C ¼ O

HOROH
Diol or glycol

R Polyimide

Diisocyanate

O

O

C

C

C

0

H2 NR NH2
Diamine

O

R
C
O

C
O
Dianhydride

S Polysulfone
NaO

CH3
C
CH3

ONa

Cl

O
S
O

Cl

26

Solution (see Table 2.2).
TABLE 2.2 Solution to Example 2.4
Part

Polymer Name

Polymer Structure

Polymerization
Type

Structure
Type

Leaving
Group

Comments

A

Polystyrene

H H
—[C—C ]—
x
H

Addition

Linear

None

B

Polyethylene

H H
—[C—C ]—
x
H H

Addition

Linear or
branched
from side
reactions

None

C

Poly(butylene
terephthalate) (PBT)

O
H—[O—(C H2 )—
O–C–
4

Condensation

Linear

H2O

D

Poly(ethylene
terephthalate) (PET)
(Dacron, Mylar)

H 3C—[O–C–

Condensation

Linear

CH3OH

Can also be made from
the diacid above,
splitting out H2O

O

O
C ]—x OH

C–O—(CH2 )—
]— OH
2 x
O

E

Nylon 6/6

O
H
H O
H—[N—(C H2 )—
–N–C—(CH2 )—
C ]—x OH
6
4

Condensation

Linear

H2O

Characteristic nylon
linkage circled

F

Nylon 6

O H
—[ C–N—(CH2 )—
]—
3 x

Condensation

Linear

None

Amide in caprolactam
splits

G

Glyptal

O
H H H
HO–C–C–C–O–C
H O H
C=O

O
C–O]—

Condensation

Branched or None
cross-linked

Structure depends on
ratio of reactants,
usually highly crosslinked see Chapter 8

Addition

Cross-linked None

Monomer has
functionality of 4 with
two double bonds

Condensation

Cross-linked H2O

Similar structures
result when
formaldehyde is
condensed with urea,
(NH2)2CO, or
phenol, f-OH

–[

C=O
O

H

Poly(diallyl
phthalate)

H H
—[C—C ]—
H
CH2
O
O=C
O=C
O
CH2
—[C—C ]—
H H

I

Melamine
formaldehyde
(Melmac, Formica)

H
H– N

C
N

N

H
N

H
C

C

OH
N
C
H–N H H
N
C
N C
H
N etc.
H

27

(Continued)

28

TABLE 2.2 (Continued)
Part

Polymer Name

J

Polytetrafluoroethylene
(Teflon TFE)

K

Poly(phenylene
oxide)

Polymerization
Type

Polymer Structure

F F
—[C—C ]—
x
F F
CH3
—[O–

Structure
Type

Leaving
Group

Addition

Linear

None

Condensation

Linear

H2O

Comments

Oxidative coupling
mechanism

]—x

CH3
L

Polypropylene

H H
—[C—C ]—
x
H CH3

Addition

Linear

None

M

Acetal (celcon,
Delrin)

H
—[C—O]—
x

Addition

Linear

None

Condensation

Linear

Characteristic
HCl (if
carbonate linkage:
alcohol
and acid,
O
will split
— O–C–O冣—
out H2O) 冢

Condensation
and epoxide
ring scission

Linear

HCl

H
N

O

Polycarbonate
(Calibre, Lexan,
Makrolon)

H—[O–

Epoxy or phenoxy

H—[O–

CH3
C–

O–C ]—x Cl

CH3

O

CH3
C–

H H H
O–C –C–C]—x
H O H

CH3

H

Only other double
bond that forms
addition polymers

For x < 8, a liquid
epoxy, if 8 < x < 20, a
solid epoxy, and for
x  100, a “phen-oxy”
plastic

H H
–OH + H2C–C–C–Cl + HO–
O H

P

Q

Poly(dimethyl
siloxane) (silicone
rubber)

Condensation
H
H O H
–O–C–C–C–O– + HCl
H H H

Linear

HCl

Will get side reaction
with no bisphenol A;
can be cross-linked
with diamines or
anhydrides through
OH termini

Condensation

Linear

HCl

Commercial materials
contain some threefunctional crosslinking agent; also
acetate groups can be
substi-tuted
for Cl

Condensation

Linear

None
Characteristic
(the C¼N urethane link is
circled. R and R0 can
group
vary widely
opens)

Condensation

Linear! (not H2O
network!)
Both amine
H’s react
with
anhydride, so
it has only a
functionality
of 2

Condensation

Linear

CH3

—[Si–O]—
x
CH3

Polyurethane

O H

H O

—[ O–R—(O–C–N–R′–N–C ]—x
R

Polyimide

O
C

O
C
–— R ––—

—[ R′–N
C
C

S

Polysulfone

—[O–

N]—x
C
C

CH3
C–

29

CH3

O
O–

S–
O

—x
]

NaCl

The characteristic
imide linkage is
circled

30

TYPES OF POLYMERS

TABLE 2.3 Examples of the Versatile Applications of Polymers
Bulletproof vests
Food containers and bottles
Furniture cushions and upholstery
Carpeting and vinyl flooring
Pharmaceutical coatings (e.g., gelcaps)
Paints (latex and oil-based)
Clothing (nearly all types)
Chewing gum
Sports equipment
Wetsuits
Shatterproof windshields
Casing for electronics

2.4

CONCLUSIONS

The division of polymers along the three categories discussed in this chapter included
response to temperature (thermosets versus thermoplastics), polymerization mechanism
(condensation versus addition), and structural organization (linear, branched, or network).
Although these are very handy distinctions used to describe a polymer, we will see in
further chapters that in some cases many polymers behave in a similar way despite having a
variety of compositions and structures, there are many variables (molecular weight,
additives, thermal processing history, etc.) that yield a wide range of properties for any
one polymer. This wide range of properties allows polymers to be used in numerous
applications (Table 2.3), as we will discover. The applications for the specific polymers in
Example 2.4 are left as a homework exercise.

PROBLEMS
1

A 40-ft “fiberglass” boat hull weighs 2000 kg. Sixty percent of that is a fully cured
cross-linked polyester resin (the remainder is the glass reinforcing fibers, pigment,
fillers, etc.). What is the molecular weight of the polymer (in g/gmol)?

2

Pyromellitic dianhydride, PMDA, is useful in a variety of polymerization reactions.
O
C

O
C

C
O

C
O

O

(a)

O

What is its functionality in polyesterification reactions? Structurally, what type
of polymer would you expect to get by reacting PMDA with a glycol (diol)?

PROBLEMS

(b)

31

Show the repeating unit of the polymer formed by reacting PMDA with
hexamethylene diamine (Part E in Example 2.4).

3

The thermotropic liquid crystal polymer Xydar is reported to be made by condensing
terephthalic acid (HOOCfCOOH), p,p0 -dihydroxybiphenyl (HOffOH),
and p-hydroxybenzoic acid (HOfCOOH). What repeating unit(s) would you
expect to find in this polymer?

4

Complete the following additions to Example 2.4 by drawing the repeat unit for each
of these polymers.
T. Polyacrylamide (PAAm)––starting monomer: acrylamide
O
C
H2N

CH
CH2

U. Polyurea––starting monomers: diamine (see part E) and diisocyanate (part Q)
V. Polyarylate––starting monomers: terephthalic acid (part C) and bisphenol-A
(part N)
W. Polyphenylene sulfide (PPS) (Ryton , Supec )––starting monomers: paradichlorobenzene and Na2S
X. Poly(pivalolactone)––starting monomer
CH3 O
H3C–C–C
H–C–O
H

Y. Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)––starting monomer: methyl methacrylate
CH3
O

H2C

CH3

O

5

By consulting the Internet (search for the Macrogalleria) or using a library resource,
list one common product that is made using each of the polymers in Example 2.4 and
in Problem 4 (A–Y).

6

Styrene (H2C¼CHf) can be polymerized along with divinylbenzene (DVB)
(H2C¼CHfHC¼CH2) to form a cross-linked polymer. If a mixture containing
99 mol% styrene and 1 mol% DVB goes to completion,
c ?
(a) What is the average number of repeat units between cross-links, x

32

TYPES OF POLYMERS

 c?
(b) What is the average molecular weight between cross-links, M
(c) Draw a portion of the chemical structure of the cross-linked polymer.Note:
f ¼ benzene ring (C6H6 or in the case of styrene: C6H5 or DVB: C6H4)
7

A polymer is made by reacting (assume completely) 2 mol of glycerin (Part G in
Example 2.4) with 3 mol of terephthalic acid (Part C in Example 2.4). Will the
polymer be linear, branched, or cross-linked? What is the molecular weight of the
resulting polymer?

8

Assume that you have supplies of the five reagents below. Consider only the reactions
discussed in the chapter and assume that they can be carried out completely and
irreversibly.
H H
C=C
H C=O
O
H
(I)

H H
C=C
H O
C=O
CH3
(II)

O
C

H3
C O
HO–C–C–OH
H

HO—(CH2 )—
OH
2

O
C
O

(III)

(IV)

(V)

(a)

Describe (show the reagents and reaction steps) how you would make a graft
copolymer with the branches distributed randomly along the main chain and
with no possibility of cross-linking. Show the main chain and branched
repeating units.
(b) Describe how you would make a block copolymer (AxByAz, with x, y, and z
not necessarily being the same). Show the A and B repeating units.
9

Given supplies of isocyanatoethyl methacrylate (IEM), and a glycol, HOROH,
and using only reactions discussed in this chapter, do the following.
H CH3 O

H H

C=C——C–O–C–C–N=C=O
H

H H

(a)

Show the repeating unit(s) of all the linear homopolymers that could be
produced.
(b) Illustrate, showing the reactions involved, two different methods of producing
a cross-linked polymer, again using only the IEM and the glycol.
10

Given supplies of acrylic acid (I), adipic acid (II), and propylene glycol (III)
H2C=CHOOH

(a)

HOOC –( CH2 )–4 COOH

HO (–CH2 )– 3 OH

Show the repeating unit(s) of all the linear homopolymers that could be
produced.

PROBLEMS

(b)

33

Describe three different procedures by which cross-linked polymers could be
produced (again using only I, II, and III).

11

Find the chemical structures of sebacic acid and propylene glycol (use your textbook,
a chemistry handbook, or the Internet). Will these react by free radical (addition)
polymerization or condensation (step growth) polymerization? Write the order of the
atoms along the repeat unit on the polymer backbone (do not include pendant groups
or groups found only at the end of the polymer chain).

12

Nylon 6,6 has carbons (CH2’s) between successive amide linkages in the repeating
structure. Nylon-11 is used by NASA for electronic coatings and has 11 carbons
between each amide linkage. Unlike Nylon 6,6, which is produced using two different
monomers, Nylon-11 is made using a single monomer structure. Draw the monomer
used to produce Nylon-11. What is the sequence of atoms that make up the polymer
backbone? (Do not include pendant groups or atoms that are present only at the end of
the polymer chain.)

13

The sidewalls of a car tire are made from polyisoprene rubber and is fully cross-linked
through the process of vulcanization.
(a) Draw the structures of the monomer (isoprene) and the repeat unit once
polymerized.
(b) Briefly describe the process of vulcanization.

14

If the polyisoprene tire sidewalls in Problem 13 weigh 5 kg, determine the molecular
weight of the cross-linked polyisoprene in g/gmol. (The answer may be surprisingly
high.)

15

As a class assignment, each student should select one common polymer from the list
below and prepare a one page infosheet that includes monomer and polymer
structures, physical properties of the polymer, and applications or end products that
the polymer is used in. The infosheets can be presented in class and copies made for
students to become part of the class notes.
Polyethylene (HDPE/LDPE)
Polypropylene, PP
Poly(ethylene terephthalate), PET
Poly(tetrafluoroethylene), PTFE, Teflon
Poly(vinyl chloride), PVC
Polystyrene, PS
Poly(methyl methacrylate), PMMA
Polycarbonates
Polyamides (Nylon 6,6)
Polyurethanes, PU
Poly(acrylic acid), PAA
Poly(N-vinyl pyrrolidone), PVP or PNVP
Polyisoprene
Polybutadiene (cis, trans, and vinyl)
Poly(acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene), ABS

34

TYPES OF POLYMERS

Aramids
Poly(cyanoacrylate)s
Poly(dimethyl siloxane), Silicone
Poly(ethylene oxide)
A visit to the website for the Macrogalleria may be helpful for most (if not all) of these
polymers.

REFERENCE
[1]

Hounshell, D.A. and J.K. Smith, Jr., Invention and Technology, Fall 1988, p. 40.

CHAPTER 3

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF POLYMERS

This chapter explores the types of bonds formed in polymers, and focuses on how weak bonds
can impact material properties. The arrangement of these bonds and side groups along the
polymer backbone also lead to a wide range of possible isomers (same chemical formula,
different arrangement of atoms) that are also important in determining polymer properties.
3.1

TYPES OF BONDS

Various types of bonds hold together the atoms in polymeric materials, unlike in metals, for
example, where only one type of bond (metallic) exists. These types are: (1) primary
covalent, (2) hydrogen bond, (3) dipole interaction, (4) van der Waals, and (5) ionic.
Examples of each are shown in Figure 3.1. Hydrogen bonds, dipole interactions, van der
Waals bonds, and ionic bonds are known collectively as secondary (or weak) bonds.
The distinctions are not always clear-cut, that is, hydrogen bonds may be considered as the
extreme of dipole interactions. The secondary bonds are generally weaker bonds and are
responsible for many of the bonds between different polymer chains (intermolecular bonds).
3.2

BOND DISTANCES AND STRENGTHS

Regardless of the type of bond, the potential energy of the interacting atoms as a function of
the separation between them is represented qualitatively by the potential function sketched
in Figure 3.2. As the interacting centers are brought together from large separation, an
increasingly great attraction tends to draw them together (negative potential energy).
Beyond the separation rm, as the atoms are brought closer together, their electronic
“atmospheres” begin to interact and a powerful repulsion is set up. At rm, the system is at a
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
Ó 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

35

36

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF POLYMERS

FIGURE 3.1

Bonding in polymer systems.

minimum potential energy, its most probable or equilibrium separation, rm being the
equilibrium bond distance. The “depth” of the potential well « is the energy required to
break the bond, separating the atoms completely.
Table 3.1 lists the approximate bond strengths and interatomic distances of the bonds
encountered in polymeric materials. The important fact to notice here is how much stronger
the primary covalent bonds are than the others. As the material’s temperature is raised and
its thermal energy (kT)1 is thereby increased, the primary covalent bonds will be the last to
dissociate when the available thermal energy exceeds their dissociation energy.
Note: kT is a representation of molecular energy from thermodynamics. k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the
absolute temperature.
1

BONDING AND RESPONSE TO TEMPERATURE

37

+
rm

Potential
energy
0

Separation, r
-ε
-

(Attraction)
Force
0

(Repulsion)

FIGURE 3.2

3.3

Interatomic potential energy and force.

BONDING AND RESPONSE TO TEMPERATURE

In linear and branched polymers, only the secondary bonds hold the individual polymer
chains together (neglecting temporary mechanical entanglements). Thus, as the temperature is raised, a point will be reached where the forces (the weak bonds of types 2–5)
holding the chains together become insignificant, and the chains are then free to slide past
one another, that is, to flow upon the application of stress. Therefore, linear and branched
polymers are generally thermoplastic. The crosslinks in a network polymer, on the other
hand, are held together by the same primary covalent bonds as are the main chains. When
the thermal energy exceeds the dissociation energy of the primary covalent bonds, both
main-chain and crosslink bonds randomly fail, and the polymer degrades. Hence, crosslinked polymers are thermosetting.
TABLE 3.1 Bond Parameters [1,2]
Bond Type
Primary covalent
Hydrogen bond
Dipole interaction
van der Waals bond
Ionic bond

Interatomic Distance, rm, nm

Dissociation Energy, «, kcal/mol

0.1–0.2
0.2–0.3
0.2–0.3
0.3–0.5
0.2–0.3

50–200
3–7
1.5–3
0.5–2
10–20

38

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF POLYMERS

There are some exceptions to these generalizations. It is occasionally possible for
secondary bonds to make up for in quantity what they lack in the quality (or strength) of a
single bond. For example, polyacrylonitrile

H H
C C x

is capable of strong dipole

H C N

interactions between the pendent nitrile groups on every other carbon atom along the
polymer backbone. If these secondary bonds could be broken one by one (i.e.,
“unzippped”), polyacrylonitrile would behave as a typical thermoplastic. This is
impossible, of course, due to the random nature of polymer configurations. By the
time enough of the secondary bonds have been dissociated to free the chains and allow
flow, the dissociation energy of some carbon–carbon backbone covalent bonds will
have been exceeded and the materials will degrade. Extreme stiffness of the polymer
chain also contributes to this sort of behavior. Cellulose has a bulky, complex repeat
unit that contains three hydroxyl groups. Though linear, its chains are therefore stiff and
strongly hydrogen bonded, and, thus, it is not thermoplastic. If the hydroxyls are
reacted with acids, such as nitric, acetic, or butyric, the resulting derivative of cellulose
(a cellulose ester) behaves as a typical thermoplastic largely because of the reduced
hydrogen bonding:
O

O

–[ R (OH3 ]–x + 3x HO –C –CH3 → –[ R (O –C –CH3)3 ]–x + 3x H2O
Cellulose

Acetic acid

Cellulose acetate

Here, three OH groups in the basic repeat unit for cellulose, glucose or C6H12O6, are
converted to acetate esters. Since cellulose is already a polymer, the acetate esters simply
modify side groups, making the structure of these cellulose derivatives more “workable.”
They are commonly used in pharmaceutical coatings and a number of foodstuffs, even
being a component in some soft-serve ice creams.
Polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon, TFE) with the repeat unit (CF2CF2) is another
example of a thermosetting material, as the close packing and extensive secondary bonding
of the main chains prevents flow when the polymer is heated.
3.4

ACTION OF SOLVENTS

The action of solvents on polymers is in many ways similar to that of heat. Appropriate
solvents, that is, those that can form strong secondary bonds with the polymer chains, can
penetrate, replace the interchain secondary bonds, and thereby pull apart and dissolve
linear and branched polymers. The polymer–solvent secondary bonds cannot overcome
primary covalent crosslinks, however, so crosslinked polymers are not soluble, although
they may swell considerably. (Try soaking a rubber band in toluene overnight or take apart
a diaper and add your favorite beverage.) The amount of swelling is, in fact, a convenient
measure of the extent of crosslinking. A lightly crosslinked polymer, such as the rubber
band or superabsorbent polymers in diapers, will swell tremendously, while one with
extensive crosslinking, for example, an ebonite (“hard rubber”) bowling ball, will not swell
noticeably at all.

BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

3.5

39

BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

It is obvious that the chemical nature of a polymer is of considerable importance in
determining the polymer’s properties. Of comparable significance is the way the atoms are
arranged geometrically within the individual polymer chains.
A look into protein structure illustrates the different types of bonds and their effects on
the three-dimensional organization of a polymer. The bonds that are found in proteins
(polypeptides) are the same as those listed here for polymers, yet weak bonds play a very
important role in determining the three-dimensional organization and biological activity of
proteins. These bonds are divided into interactions at four levels (and demonstrated for a
protein in Figure 3.3).
1. Primary Bonds: These are covalent bonds that link monomers and make up the
backbone of the polymer. This is also termed the one-dimensional structure, as it can
be represented by laying out repeat units in a straight line (which is handy for
demonstrations in a book, but hardly representative of the complex three-dimensional structure of polymers, as depicted as a bowl of spaghetti).

FIGURE 3.3 Demonstration of the different levels of bonding and structural arrangement in
polymers (here, for a polypeptide). The primary structure links amino acids (monomers) and starts to
form shapes at the secondary level through weak bonds (such as the hydrogen bonds and cysteine
disulfide bonds visible in the alpha helix). Higher levels of structure are quite regular in proteins,
allowing for complex shapes that are unique for each protein. For synthetic polymers, the shapes are
much more random.

40

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF POLYMERS

FIGURE 3.4 The geometry of a polyethylene chain. The carbon backbone is shown in black, with
CCC bond angle of 109.5 , and the gray hydrogen atoms alternating positions along the backbone
to minimize repulsive forces between consecutive side groups.

2. Secondary Bonds: These are weak bonds between near-neighbor repeat units,
covering a range of perhaps 10–20 repeat units. Hydrogen bonds are common here
and cause an impact on the formation of coils or zig-zag structures.
3. Tertiary Bonds: These are weak intramolecular bonds (those between a polymer and
itself) between repeat units that are widely separated in the one-dimensional
structure (i.e., perhaps an alcohol in the side group of the third repeat unit hydrogen
bonds to a carboxylic acid in the 8000th repeat unit). These bonds hold the threedimensional structure of an individual polymer in place.
4. Quaternary Bonds: These are weak intermolecular bonds (those between two
different polymers). They stabilize the three-dimensional structure of a polymeric
material, linking the different chains without forming covalent bonds (which would
cause a network to form). This breakdown of bonding in proteins is essentially the
same for all polymers, although commercial homopolymers do not display the same
structural complexity of proteins.
The carbon atom is normally (exclusively, for our purposes) tetravalent. In compounds
such as methane (CH4) and carbon tetrachloride (CCl4), the four identical substituents
surround the carbon in a symmetrical tetrahedral geometry. If the substituent atoms are
not identical, the symmetry is destroyed, but the general tetrahedral pattern is maintained. This is still true for each carbon atom in the interior of a linear polymer chain,
where two of the substituents are the extensions of the polymer backbone. If a
polyethylene chain (in normal spaghetti-type coil) were to be stretched out, for
example, the carbon atoms in the chain backbone would lie in a zigzag fashion in a
plane, with the hydrogen substituents on either side of the plane (Figure 3.4). In the case
of polyethylene, in which all the substituents are the same, this is the only arrangement
possible. With vinyl polymers, however, there are several possible ways of arranging
the side groups.
3.6

STEREOISOMERISM IN VINYL POLYMERS

Before beginning a discussion of the isomerism in vinyl polymers, it must be pointed out
that the monomers (H2C¼CHX, where X can be Cl, OH, an organic group, etc.)
polymerize almost exclusively in a head-to-tail fashion, placing the X groups on every
other carbon atom along the chain. Although head-to-head (or tail-to-tail) connections
are possible, steric hindrances between successive X groups (particularly if the X group
is bulky) and electrostatic repulsion between groups with similar polarities generally
keeps most of the linkages as head-to-tail. Ignoring head-to-head connections, there are

STEREOISOMERISM IN VINYL POLYMERS

FIGURE 3.5

41

Stereoisomers of polystyrene showing isotactic, syndiotactic, and atactic structures.

then three possible ways in which the X side group may be arranged with respect to
the carbon backbone plane (see Figure 3.5). These arrangements represent three types
of stereoisomers:
1. Atactic: A random arrangement of the X groups. Its lack of regularity has important
consequences.
2. Isotactic: The structure in which all the X groups are lined up on the same side of the
backbone plane.
3. Syndiotactic: Alternating placement of the X group on either side of the plane.
These three terms were coined by Dr. Giulio Natta, who shared the 1964 Nobel Chemistry
Prize for his work in this area. Although atactic polymers are certainly most common, the
arrangement and packing (and thus the properties) of stereoregular (syndiotactic and
isotactic) polymers makes them important for certain applications. Methods to synthesize
the stereoregular isomers will be discussed in Part II of this book.
Although useful for descriptive purposes, the planar zigzag arrangement of the mainchain carbon atoms is not always the one preferred by nature, that is, it is not necessarily
the minimum free-energy configuration. In the case of polyethylene, it is, but for isotactic
and syndiotactic polypropylene (which has a pendent methyl, CH3, group), the preferred
(minimum-energy) configurations are quite regular, with the backbone forming helical
twists to maximize the distance between consecutive CH3 groups. The atactic polymer,
however, lacks regular twists and has an irregular shape.
Atactic polypropylene has a consistency somewhat like used chewing gum, whereas the
stereoregular forms are hard, rigid plastics. The reason why this regularity (or lack of it) has
a profound effect on mechanical properties is discussed in the next chapter.
The type of stereoregularity described above is a direct result of the dissymmetry of
vinyl monomers. It is established in the polymerization reaction and no amount of twisting
and turning the chain about its bonds can convert the three-dimensional geometry of one
stereoisomer into another (molecular models are a real help, here).

42

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF POLYMERS

The situation is even more complex for monomers of the form HXC¼CHX0 , where X
and X0 are different substituent groups. This is discussed by Natta [3], but is currently of no
commercial importance.
Example 3.1 Both isotactic and atactic polymers of propylene oxide
H H
H C C CH3
O

have been prepared by ring scission polymerization.
(a) Write the general structural formula of the polymer.
(b) Indicate how the atactic, isotactic, and syndiotactic structures differ.
Solution.
(a)
O

H H
C C x
H CH3

(b)

O

O

O

3.7

H H

H H

H

CH3

C C O
H CH3

C

C O
H CH3

C

C

H

H

H H

H H

C C O
H CH3

C

H

H

O

C

C

H CH3

H

CH3

H H

H CH3

H

H

C C O
H CH3

C

C

C

H

CH3

C

C

H H

O

Atactic

Isotactic

Syndiotactic

STEREOISOMERISM IN DIENE POLYMERS

Another type of stereoisomerism arises in the case of poly-1,4-dienes because carbon–
carbon double bonds are rigid and do not allow rotation. The substituent groups on the
double-bonded carbons may be either on the same side of the chain (cis) or on the opposite
sides (trans), as shown in Figure 3.6 for 1,4 polyisoprene.
The chains of cis-1,4-polyisoprene assume a tortured, irregular configuration because of
the steric interference of the substituents adjacent to the double bonds. This stereoisomer is
familiar as natural rubber (made by the rubber tree) and is used in rubber bands. trans-1,4polyisoprene chains assume a regular structure. This polymer is known as gutta-percha, a
tough but not elastic material, long used as a golf-ball cover.

STEREOISOMERISM IN DIENE POLYMERS

43

FIGURE 3.6 cis and trans isomers result from polymerization of isoprene.

Note that stereoisomerism in poly-1,4-dienes does not depend on the dissymmetry of
the repeating unit. Atactic, syndiotactic, and isotactic isomers are possible with butadiene,
even though all of the carbon substituents are hydrogen, as shown in Example 3.2.
Example 3.2 Identify all possible structural and stereoisomers that can result from the
addition polymerization of butadiene:
H H H H
C C C C
H
H

Solution. Recall from Chapter 2 that butadiene can undergo 1,4-addition or 1,2-addition
(3,4-addition results in the same structure as 1,2-addition). The 1,4-polymer can have cis
and trans isomers like the 1,4-polyisoprene in Figure 3.6. The 1,2-polymer can have
atactic, isotactic, and syndiotactic stereoisomers like any vinyl polymer. The 1,4-polymer
results in a different structure, but cannot have stereoisomers because all of the carbons are
part of the backbone of the polymer and both the substituents remaining on the double bond
in the backbone are hydrogens.
H H
C C x
H

CH
CH2

Example 3.3 Identify all the possible structural and stereoisomers that can result from the
addition polymerization of chloroprene (this rubbery polymer is commercially known as
Neoprene and is used in wetsuits).
H Cl H H
C C C C
H
H

44

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF POLYMERS

Solution. As in Example 3.2, the 1,4-polymer can have cis and trans stereoisomers (two
different possibilities). This unsymmetrical diene monomer can also undergo both 1,2-and
3,4-addition:
H Cl
C C x
H

CH
HCH
1, 2

H H
C C x
Cl H

H

HCH
3, 4

Each of these structural isomers may have atactic, isotactic, or syndiotactic stereoisomers (making for six more possible isomers). Thus, in principle at least, there are eight
different isomers of polychloroprene possible.

3.8

SUMMARY

Bonding in polymers is significantly more complex than in metals. The variety of bonds
and the way side groups are organized in isomers make for the wide range of properties
polymers can have, as will be demonstrated in later chapters.

PROBLEMS
1

Given the monomers below:
H
H
H N CH26 N H

O H H H H O
HO C C C C C C OH
H
H

H H O
C C C OH
H

(a) Show the repeating units of all the linear homopolymers that could be produced.
(b) Which of the polymers, if any, could have cis and trans isomers? Illustrate. How
would this differ from the isomerism that arises in 1,4-polydienes?
(c) Which of the polymers, if any, could have isotactic and syndiotactic isomers?
Illustrate.
2

Draw chemical structures of isotactic and syndiotactic oligomers of vinyl alcohol with
five repeat units; include hydrogen atoms for the end groups.

3 (a)

Draw a structure to represent the triblock polymer, poly(ethylene oxide-bpropylene oxide-b-ethylene oxide), PEOm-PPOn-PEOm. This polymer is used
as a surfactant and has the tradename PluronicÒ . For your structure, use Pluronic
F127, where m ¼ 99 and n ¼ 65.
(b) If you were to stretch out a Pluronic F127 in planar zigzag form, without violating
required bond angles, so that all of the atoms in the polymer backbone were in the
same plane, estimate the order of magnitude for the polymer chain length,
including the end groups (H’s), on the polymer backbone.

REFERENCES



45

Bond

Bond Length, A

Bond Type

Bond Angle, 

CC
C¼C
CH
CO
CN
C¼O

1.54
1.34
1.20
1.43
1.47
1.23

CCC

109.5

CC¼C

122

COC
OCC

108
110

REFERENCES
[1] Platzer, N., Ind. Eng. Chem. 61(5) 10, 1969.
[2] Miller, M.L., The Structure of Polymers. Reinhold, New York, 1966.
[3] Natta, G., Sci. Am. 205(2), 33 (1961).

CHAPTER 4

POLYMER MORPHOLOGY

It was pointed out in the previous chapter that the geometric arrangement of the atoms in
polymer chains can exert a significant influence on the properties of the bulk polymer. To
appreciate why this is so, the subject of polymer morphology, the structural arrangement of
the chains in the polymer, is introduced here.
Covalent bonds hold the polymer together but with macromolecules (another term for
polymers), the long-range structure is more like a bowl of spaghetti (Figure 4.1), where the
backbones of linear polymers twist and turn in a random fashion. This means that the
“length” of a polymer is never the actual distance between the end groups in a stretched-out
polymer. The dimensional space occupied by a polymer is best described by two
parameters, the end-to-end distance, <r>, and the radius of gyration <rg>. Here, the
< > brackets indicate that the terms are statistical averages over many polymer chains.
<rg> is the average distance from the centroid (mass-weighted center) of a polymer chain
to each of the monomer units. It would be equal to the radius of a sphere if a polymer were
ever balled up perfectly. Even though that is unlikely, <rg> is a useful term to represent the
three-dimensional space taken up by a polymer molecule.
The end-to-end distance is a physical length separating the first and the last repeat units
on a single polymer chain. This can have two extremes: on one hand, the polymer can be
stretched out entirely along the backbone, limited by bond lengths and bond angles (highly
unlikely), while on the other, the polymer can twist and turn and end up with the first and
the last repeat unit in the same location (r ¼ 0). When statistically averaged, <r>, is
somewhat more useful, as it can indicate whether a polymeric material consists of entwined
stretched-out fibers with many weak intermolecular bonds, or if the material is made up of
distinct blobs of polymers that prefer weak intramolecular bonds.
The arrangement of individual polymers in a material is broken down to general regions:
amorphous (unstructured) and crystalline. This chapter covers the types of crystallinity in
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

46

AMORPHOUS AND CRYSTALLINE POLYMERS

47

FIGURE 4.1 Depiction of (a) Three polymer chains randomly oriented and (b) a depiction of the
end-to-end distance, <r>, for a single polymer. Also shown in figure (b) is the radius of gyration,
<rg>, which represents the average distance from the center of gravity to each monomer unit.

polymers and describes how crystals (and the degree of crystallinity) impact the optical and
the mechanical properties of the polymers.
4.1

AMORPHOUS AND CRYSTALLINE POLYMERS

What is a crystal? For salts and metals, crystals are fairly straightforward because these
materials exist primarily as crystals when solid. The arrangement of atoms can affect the
type of crystallinity (e.g., face-centered cubic), but the main effect of crystals is to bring
atoms together in a regular arrangement. Thinking back to the bowl of cooked spaghetti
representation of polymers, regular arrangement may seem nearly impossible (and it is for
some polymers, particularly those with bulky side groups). For polymers with small side
groups (such as polyethylene), large segments of polymers can arrange into crystals, but
there are no polymers that are 100% crystalline.
Although the precise nature of crystallinity in polymers is still under investigation, a
number of facts have long been known about the requirements for polymer crystallinity.
First, an ordered, regular chain structure (such as an isotactic or a syndiotactic isomer) is
necessary to allow the chains to pack into an ordered, regular, three-dimensional crystal
lattice. Thus, stereoregular polymers are more likely to have sizable crystalline portions
than those that have irregular chain structures. Similarly, large pendent groups, particularly
if they are spaced irregularly, hinder crystallinity. Second, no matter how regular the
chains, the secondary forces holding the chains together in the crystal lattice must be strong
enough to overcome the disordering effect of thermal energy; so hydrogen bonding or

48

POLYMER MORPHOLOGY

strong dipole interactions promote crystallinity and, other things being equal, raise the
crystalline melting temperature.
X-ray diffraction studies show that there are numerous polymers that do not meet the
above criteria and show no traces of crystallinity, that is, they are completely amorphous. In
contrast to the regular, ordered arrangement in a crystal lattice, the chains in an amorphous
polymer mass assume a more-or-less random, twisted, entangled, “balled-up” configuration, as in the bowl of cooked spaghetti. A better analogy, in view of the constant thermal
motion of the chain segments, is a bowl of wriggling worms. The latter analogy forms the
basis of a currently popular quantitative model of polymer behavior known as reptation
theory (named for the motion of reptiles).
At the other extreme, despite intensive efforts, no one has succeeded in producing a
completely crystalline polymer. The crystalline content may in certain cases (in very
regular polymers without bulky side groups) reach 98%, but at least a few percent
noncrystalline material always remains. In the case of metals, crystal defect concentrations
are normally on the order of parts per million, so metals are generally considered perfectly
crystalline in comparison with even the most highly crystalline polymers. Interestingly,
recently developed amorphous metals have expanded the range of material properties that
can be achieved by many metals. While crystal defects in metals are often the sites of
fracture, polymers have covalent bonds linking the crystalline and amorphous regions,
making the interfaces between these regions more continuous. The ability to tailor and
adjust crystal size and degree of crystallinity (percent crystalline versus percent amorphous) allows for a wide range of mechanical properties in polymers, from rubbery and
flexible (largely amorphous with small crystals) to rigid and strong (largely crystalline).
References 1–5 contain extensive discussions of the techniques used to study crystallinity in polymers as well as reviews of research results.
4.2 THE EFFECT OF POLYMER STRUCTURE, TEMPERATURE, AND
SOLVENT ON CRYSTALLINITY
Polymer crystals are highly ordered arrangements of polymer segments. Because they are
stabilized by weak bonds, anything that can alter or disrupt these bonds will cause a drop
in the degree of crystallinity. Perhaps most straightforward is the effect of temperature.
As with all crystalline solids, as the temperature rises, bonds holding a crystal together
begin to come apart, resulting in a melting transition (Tm). For polymers, it should be
noted that only the crystalline portion melts, so a 100% amorphous polymer will not
exhibit a Tm (but it will degrade as the temperature continues to rise). The effect of
temperature on polymer structure is of great significance, therefore Chapter 6 is devoted
entirely to this subject.
Solvents can also disrupt weak polymer bonds, thus they have an effect on crystals
similar to melting. Solvents are small molecules (at least when compared to polymers) that
can diffuse into a polymer and form new weak bonds, thus replacing polymer–polymer
interactions with polymer–solvent interactions. Because polymers are so large, the
solvation process can be lengthy (hours to days to dissolve in some cases). In a good
solvent, especially in dilute solutions, polymer crystallinity disappears. Upon drying (or
cooling a molten polymer), the chains can reform crystals with the crystal size and the
degree of crystallinity dependent on the rate of solvent evaporation (or rate of cooling). The
behavior of polymers in solution is covered in Chapter 7.

THE EFFECT OF CRYSTALLINITY ON POLYMER DENSITY

49

Because polymer crystals have a regular arrangement of the polymer backbone, the
side groups (and their tacticity) are crucial in determining whether a polymer will
crystallize. Bulky side groups (large groups that extend from the backbone) prevent this
alignment, so polymers such as poly(methyl methacrylate), shown below, are entirely
amorphous. It should be noted that most polymers do not display appreciable crystallinity,
particularly those with bulky side groups that prevent chain alignment. The irregular
arrangement of these groups (in atactic polymers) also hinders the formation of crystals.
On the other hand, side groups with organic functionalities that can form weak bonds (e.g.,
OH) can increase the tendency for a polymer to crystallize.

4.3

THE EFFECT OF CRYSTALLINITY ON POLYMER DENSITY

For simplicity, let us assume that only crystalline and amorphous phases are present. With a
given polymer, the properties of each phase remain the same but the relative amounts of the
phases can vary, and this can strongly influence the bulk properties, particularly the
mechanical properties. This is illustrated for polyethylene below, the most crystallizable
polymer due to its simple repeat unit structure (CH2CH2).
Since polymer chains are packed together more efficiently and tightly in crystalline
areas than in amorphous areas, crystallites will have a higher density. Thus, low-density
(0.92 g/cm3) polyethylene is estimated to be about 43% crystalline, while high density
(0.97 g/cm3) polyethylene is about 76% crystalline. Density is, in fact, a convenient
measure of the degree of crystallinity. Because the volumes of the crystalline and
amorphous phases are additive, density and degree of crystallinity are related by
1 wc wa wc ð1  wc Þ
¼
þ
¼
þ
rc
r rc ra
ra

ð4:1Þ

where the w’s are weight fractions and the subscripts c and a refer to the crystalline and
amorphous phases, respectively.
In the case of polyethylene, the differences in degree of crystallinity arise largely from
branching that occurs during polymerization (although it is also influenced by the
molecular weight and the rate of cooling, as will be discussed later in Chapter 6). The
branch points sterically hinder packing into a crystal lattice in their immediate vicinity, and
thus lower the degree of crystallinity.

50

POLYMER MORPHOLOGY

TABLE 4.1 The Influence of Crystallinity on Some of the Properties of
Polyethylenea
Commercial Product

Low Density

Medium Density

High Density

3

0.910–0.925
42–53
15–30

0.926–0.940
54–63
5–15

0.941–0.965
64–80
1–5

110–120
41–46
0.14–0.38  105
(0.97–2.6  108)
600–2300
(0.41–1.6  107)
0.08–0.6  105
(0.34–4.1  108)

120–130
50–60
0.25–0.55  105
(1.7–3.8  108)
1200–3500
(0.83–2.4  107)
0.6–1.15  105
(4.1–7.9  108)

130–136
60–70
0.6–1.8  105
(4.1–12.4  108)
3100–5500
(2.1–3.8  107)
1.0–2.6  105
(6.9–18  108)

Density range, g/cm
Approximate % crystallinity
Branching, equivalent CH3 groups/1000
carbon atoms
Crystalline melting point,  C
Hardness, Shore D
Tensile modulus, psi, N/m2
Tensile strength, psi, N/m2
Flexural modulus, psi, N/m2

a
It must be kept in mind that mechanical properties are influenced by factors other than the degree of crystallinity
(molecular weight, in particular).

Low-density polyethylene (LDPE) has traditionally been made by a high-pressure process
(25,000–50,000 psi) and high-density polyethylene (HDPE) by a low-pressure process
(100 psi). Thus, LDPE is sometimes referred to as high-pressure polyethylene and HDPE
as low-pressure polyethylene. If they were not confusing enough, LDPE are now also made
by low-pressure processes similar to those used for HDPE. There are also polyethylenes with
small grafted organic groups along the backbone. These materials have most unfortunately
(and inaccurately) been termed linear, low-density polyethylene (LLDPE). If they were truly
linear, they would not be of low density.
Traditional (high pressure) LDPE is a homopolymer. Its long, “branched branches” arise
from a side reaction during polymerization. LLDPE, however, has short branches that are
introduced by random copolymerization with minor amounts (say 8–10%) of one or more
a-olefins (vinyl monomers with hydrocarbon X groups, such as 1-butene, 1-hexene,
1-octene, and 4-methyl-1-pentene). This same approach is extended (by adding more
comonomer) to make very-low density polyethylene (VLDPE) or ultralow density
polyethylene (ULDPE). (r < 0.915 g/cm3). The nature of the branching affects some
properties to a certain extent. For example, LLDPEs form stronger, tougher films than
LDPEs of equivalent density. The various polyethylenes are summarized in Table 4.1 and
their molecular architectures are sketched in Figure 4.2. Equation 4.1 must be used with
caution where the density is varied with a comonomer, as in LLDPE, because ra will, in
general, vary with copolymer composition.
4.4

THE EFFECT OF CRYSTALLINITY ON MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

Since the polymer chains are more closely packed in the crystalline areas than in the
amorphous, there are more of them available per unit area to support a stress. Also, since
they are in close and regular contact over relatively long distances in the crystallites, the
secondary forces holding them together are cumulatively greater than in the amorphous
regions. Thus, crystallinity can significantly increase the strength and rigidity of a polymer.
For this reason, stereoregular polypropylenes, which can and do crystallize, are fairly hard,

THE EFFECT OF CRYSTALLINITY ON OPTICAL PROPERTIES

51

LLDPE

HOPE

LDPE

FIGURE 4.2

Molecular architecture of various polyethylenes.

rigid plastics, while irregular, atactic polypropylenes are amorphous, soft, and sticky. And,
other things being equal, the greater the ratio of crystalline to amorphous phase, the
stronger, harder, more rigid, and less easily deformable the polymer will be, as illustrated in
Table 4.1 for the hardness, tensile modulus, tensile strength, and flexural modulus. These
parameters (and several others) will be discussed in detail in Chapter 16, but each of these
parameters tends higher with an increase in the crystallinity of polyethylene.
4.5

THE EFFECT OF CRYSTALLINITY ON OPTICAL PROPERTIES

The optical properties of polymers are largely influenced by crystallinity. A polymer with
no additives is normally either clear or white and opaque (or transluscent, somewhere inbetween the two extremes), as illustrated in Figure 4.3. When light passes between two

FIGURE 4.3

Typical plastic objects that are transparent, translucent, and opaque.

52

POLYMER MORPHOLOGY

phases with different refractive indices, some of it is scattered at the interface if the
dimensions of the discontinuities are comparable to or greater than the wavelength of
visible light (400–700 nm). Thus, a block of ice is transparent, but snow appears white
because light passes alternately from air to ice crystals many times. Similarly, in a
crystalline polymer, the usually denser crystalline areas have a higher refractive index
than the amorphous areas, so crystalline polymers are either opaque or translucent
because light is scattered as it passes from one phase to the other. So, in general,
transparent polymer’s are completely amorphous, and a simple visual inspection can
give clues about a polymer’s crystallinity (although additives are often used that can
change the optical properties). An interesting exception arises in the case of isotactic poly
(4-methyl-1-pentene). The refractive indices (and densities) of the amorphous and
crystalline phases are almost identical. Thus, as far as light is concerned, it is a
homogeneous material and is the single transparent polymer that is known to be highly
crystalline. Also, as the dimensions of the dispersed-phase particles become smaller than
the wavelength of visible light (consider nanoparticle additives), scattering decreases, so a
polymer with very small crystals and a low degree of crystallinity might appear nearly
transparent, particularly in thin sections.
The converse is not necessarily true; lack of transparency in a polymer may be due to
crystallinity, but it can be caused by an added second phase, such as a filler. If the polymer
is known to be a pure homopolymer, however, translucency is a sure sign of crystallinity.
Thus, commercial homopolymers of styrene, which is atactic and, therefore, completely
amorphous because of the irregular arrangement of the bulky phenyl side groups, is
perfectly transparent. Ironically, it is often called “crystal” polystyrene because of its
crystal clarity. Isotactic polystyrene has been synthesized in the laboratory and does
crystallize. It has the white, translucent appearance typical of polyethylene. Foamed
polystyrene (cups, packing peanuts) is white because light passes between atactic
polystyrene and gas bubbles. High-impact polystyrene consists of a dispersion of
1–10 mm polybutadiene rubber particles in a continuous phase of atactic polystyrene.
Thus, while each phase is completely amorphous and individually transparent, they
have different refractive indices, so the composite material scatters light and appears
white and translucent.
Example 4.1 Explain the following facts.
(a) Polyethylene and polypropylene produced with stereospecific catalysts each are
fairly rigid, translucent plastics, while a 65–35 copolymer of the two, produced in
exactly the same manner, is a soft, transparent rubber.
(b) A plastic is similar in appearance and mechanical properties to the polyethylene and
polypropylene described in (a), but it consists of 65% ethylene and 35% propylene
units. The two components of this plastic cannot be separated by any physical or
chemical means without degrading the polymer.
Solution.
(a) The polyethylene produced with these catalysts is linear and thus highly crystalline.
The polypropylene is isotactic and also highly crystalline. The crystallinity confers
mechanical strength and translucency to each polymer individually. The 65–35
copolymer, ethylene-propylene rubber (EPR), is a random copolymer, so the CH3

MODELS FOR THE CRYSTALLINE STRUCTURE OF POLYMERS

53

groups from the propylene monomer are arranged at irregular intervals along the
chain, preventing packing in a regular crystal lattice, giving an amorphous, rubbery
polymer.
(b) Since the components cannot be separated, they must be covalently bound within
the chains. The properties indicate a crystalline polymer, so the CH3 groups from
the propylene cannot be spaced irregularly, as in the random copolymer in (a). Thus,
these materials must be block copolymers of ethylene and stereoregular polypropylene, poly(ethylene-b-propylene). The long blocks of ethylene pack into a
polyethylene crystal lattice and the propylene blocks into a polypropylene lattice.
4.6
4.6.1

MODELS FOR THE CRYSTALLINE STRUCTURE OF POLYMERS
Fringed Micelle Model

The first attempt to explain the observed properties of crystalline (the word should be
prefaced by “semi-” but rarely is) polymers was the fringed micelle model (Figure 4.4).
This model pictures crystalline regions known as fringed micelles or crystallites interspersed in an amorphous matrix. The crystallites, whose dimensions are in the order of tens
of nanometers, are small volumes in which portions of the chains are regularly aligned
parallel to one another, tightly packed into a crystal lattice. The individual chains, however,
are many times longer than the dimensions of a crystallite, so they pass from one crystallite
to another through amorphous areas.
This model nicely explains the coexistence of crystalline and amorphous material in
polymers, and also explains the increase in crystallinity that is observed when fibers are
drawn (stretched). Stretching the polymer orients the chains in the direction of the stress,
increasing the alignment in the amorphous areas and producing greater degrees of
crystallinity (Figure 4.4b). Since the chains pass randomly from one crystallite to another,
it is easy to know why perfect crystallinity can never be achieved. This also explains why
the effects of crystallinity on properties are in many ways similar to those of crosslinking,
because, like crosslinks, the crystallites tie the individual chains together. Unlike crosslinks, though, the crystallites do not form covalent bonds between polymer chains and will
generally melt before the polymer degrades and solvents that form strong secondary bonds
with the chains can dissolve them (rather than just swell a crosslinked polymer).

FIGURE 4.4 The fringed micelle model: (a) unoriented; (b) chains oriented by applied stress.

54

POLYMER MORPHOLOGY

The fringed micelle model has been superseded as new information has led to the
development of more advanced models. Nevertheless, it still does a good job of qualitatively predicting the effects of crystallinity on the mechanical properties of the polymers.
Example 4.2 Because the monomer vinyl alcohol is unstable, poly vinyl alcohol, PVA, is
made by polymerization of vinyl acetate followed by the hydrolysis of poly vinyl acetate to
form OH side groups:

The extent of reaction may be controlled to yield polymers with anywhere from 0% to
100% of the original acetate groups hydrolyzed. Pure poly(vinyl acetate), 0% hydrolyzed,
is insoluble in water. It has been observed, however, that as the extent of hydrolysis is
increased, the polymers become more water soluble, up to about 87% hydrolysis, after
which further hydrolysis decreases water solubility at room temperature. Explain briefly.
Solution. The normal poly vinyl acetate is atactic, and the irregular arrangement of the
acetate side groups renders it completely amorphous. Water cannot form strong enough
secondary bonds with the chains to dissolve it with the generally hydrophobic pendent
group. As the acetate groups are replaced by hydroxyls in PVA (much more hydrophilic),
sites are introduced that can form hydrogen bonds with water, thereby increasing the
solubility. At high degrees of substitution, the more compact hydroxyl pendent groups
allow the chains to pack into a crystal lattice. The hydroxyl groups provide hydrogenbonding sites between the chains that help hold them in the lattice, and thus solubility in
water is reduced.
Example 4.3 Explain the following experiment. A weight is tied to the end of a poly(vinyl
alcohol) fiber. The weight and part of the fiber are dunked in a beaker of boiling water. As
long as the weight remains suspended, the situation is stable, but when the weight is rested
on the bottom of the beaker, the fiber dissolves.
Solution. As long as the weight is suspended from the fiber, the stress maintains the
alignment of the chains in a crystal lattice against the disordering effects of thermal energy
and solvent (water) penetration. When the weight is rested on the bottom, the stress is
removed, allowing water to penetrate between and dissolving the polymer chains.
4.6.2

Lamellar Crystals [1–7]

The first direct observation of the nature of polymer crystallinity resulted from the growth
of single crystals from dilute solution. Either by cooling or by evaporation of solvent, thin
pyramidal or plate-like polymer crystals (lamellae) were precipitated from dilute solutions

MODELS FOR THE CRYSTALLINE STRUCTURE OF POLYMERS

FIGURE 4.5

55

Polymer single crystals in flat lamellae. Two concepts of chain reentry are illustrated.

(Figure 4.5). These crystals were on the order of 10 mm along a side and only about 0.01 mm
thick. This was fine, except that X-ray measurements showed that the polymer chains were
aligned perpendicular to the large flat faces of the crystals, and it was known that the
extended length of the individual chains was on the order of 0.1 mm. How could a chain fit
into a crystal one-tenth of its length? The only answer is that the chain must fold back on
itself, as shown in Figure 4.5. Two competing models of chain folding are illustrated: either
the polymer folds back neatly on itself or several chains align for short distances with
amorphous regions outside the crystal.
This folded-chain model has been well substantiated for single polymer crystals. The
lamellae are about 50–60 carbon atoms thick, with about five carbon atoms in a direct
reentry fold. The atoms in a fold, whether direct or indirect reentry, can never be part of a
crystal lattice.
It is now well established that similar lamellar crystallites exist in bulk polymer samples
crystallized from polymer melts, although the lamellae may be up to 1 mm thick. Recent
results support the presence of a third, interfacial region between the crystalline lamellae
and the amorphous phase. This interfacial phase can make up about 10–20% of the
material. Furthermore, there does not seem to be much, if any, direct-reentry folding of
chains in bulk (or melt)-crystallized lamellae. This is illustrated in Figure 4.6. Orientation
of the lamellae along with additional orientation and crystallization in the interlamellar
amorphous regions, as in the fringed micelle model, is usually invoked to explain the
increase in the degree of crystallinity with drawing (stretching).
4.6.3

Spherulites

Not only are polymer chains often arranged to form crystallites but also these crystallites
often aggregate into supermolecular structures known as spherulites. Spherulites are in
some ways similar to the grain structure found in metals. They grow radially from a point of
nucleation until other spherulites are encountered. Thus, the size of the spherulites can be
controlled by the number of nucleation sites present, with more nuclei resulting in more but
smaller spherulites. They are typically about 0.01 mm in diameter and have a Maltese cross
appearance when viewed between polarizing filters (Figure 4.7a). Figure 4.7 shows how the
polymer chains are thought to be arranged in the spherulites.
Large spherulites, which can grow as a polymer cools, contribute to brittleness in
polymers and also scatters a lot of light. To minimize brittleness and enhance transparency,
nucleating agents are often added or the polymer is shock-cooled (which increases the
nucleation rate) to promote smaller spherulites.

56

POLYMER MORPHOLOGY

FIGURE 4.6 Compromise model showing folded-chain lamellae tied together by interlamellar
amorphous chains.

FIGURE 4.7 Spherulite crystals: (a) appearance between crossed polarizing filters; (b) branching
of lamellae; (c) orientation of chains in lamellae.

4.7

EXTENDED CHAIN CRYSTALS

Polymers crystallized from a quiescent melt (such as those in Table 4.1) will have, in
general, a random orientation of the chains at the macroscopic level. While the chains in
any crystallite are oriented in a particular direction, the multiple crystallites are randomly
oriented. It has long been known that if the chain axes could share a common orientation at
the macroscopic level, the material would have superior mechanical properties in the

LIQUID CRYSTAL POLYMERS

57

orientation direction, since the chains would be arranged most efficiently to support a
stress. In fact, fiber drawing does just this to a certain extent, which is why it is practiced.
Polymers crystallized while being subjected to an extensional flow (drawing), which
tends to disentangle the chains and align them in the direction of flow, form fibrillar
structures. These are believed to be extended-chain crystals, in which the chains are
aligned parallel to one another over great distances, with little or no chain folding [8].
When fibers of such materials are further drawn, a super-strong fiber results. Very high
molecular weight polymers are favored for this purpose. The longer chains align more
readily, and there are fewer crystalline defects due to chain ends. Also, formation of the
fibers from relatively dilute solution allows easier disentanglement and better alignment
of the chains.
For linear polyethylene fibers made in this fashion, the tensile modulus (a measure of the
strength of a material, which is defined more rigorously in Chapter 16) of 44 GPa
(6.4  106 psi) compares well with steel (which is about 206 GPa or 30  106 psi) but has
a density 7.6 times as great! PE fibers with a tensile strength of 1.8 GPa (2.6  105 psi) have
also been claimed [9]. Compare these figures with those for ordinary, quiescently
crystallized HDPE in Table 4.1.
Extended-chain crystals have also been identified as tying together lamellae in bulkcrystallized polymers and forming the core (“skewer”) of the interesting “shish kebab”
structures grown from dilute solutions subjected to shearing [10].
4.8

LIQUID CRYSTAL POLYMERS [11]

As noted above, if polymer chains can be aligned in the molten state (the polymer melt)
prior to crystallization, high degrees of extended-chain crystallinity may be formed,
imparting remarkable mechanical properties, at least in the chain direction. Another way
of doing it is by starting with molecules that show a degree of order in the liquid phase;
these are generally made from rigid monomers that have phenyl groups that become part of
the polymer backbone. Such liquid-crystalline materials have been known for years, but
until fairly recently were limited to relatively small molecules. Now, however, several types
of polymers are known that exhibit liquid-crystalline order, either lyotropic (that become
ordered in solution) or thermotropic (that become ordered in the melt) [12].
Kevlar is an aromatic polyamid (“aramid”) with the repeat unit:

It is spun into fibers from a lyotropic liquid-crystalline solution in concentrated H2SO4.
The solution is extruded through small holes into a bath that leaches the acid out of the
polymer, forming the fibers (through a “wet spinning” process, as discussed in Chapter 17).
Because the molecules are oriented prior to crystallization, the fibers maintain a high
degree of extended-chain crystalline order in the fiber direction, imparting remarkable
strength. Table 4.2 compares some properties of these fibers with those of ordinary nylon
6/6 fibers. With a density of only 1.44 g/cm3, they compare very favorably with other
reinforcing fibers (glass, graphite, etc.) on a strength per weight basis. As a result, Kevlar

58

POLYMER MORPHOLOGY

TABLE 4.2 Comparison of Liquid-Crystalline Kevar 49 Fibers with Nylon 6/6
Fibers [13]
Kevlar 49
Tensile strength, GPa, psi
Tensile modulus, GPa, psi
Elongation to break, %

Nylon 6/6

2.95 (4.3  10 )
130 (19  106)
2.3
5

1.28 (1.8  105)
6.2 (3.0  105)
19

fibers are used in bullet-proof vests and other ballistic armor, as a tire cord (replacing steel
belts to improve strength and offering sidewall puncture resistance as well), and for
reinforcement in high-strength composites.
Several thermotropic aromatic copolyesters have also been commercialized. Vectra A
is reported to have the repeating units

and Xydar have the repeat units

These thermotropic liquid-crystalline polymers have high melting points but can be
melt-processed like other thermoplastics. The macroscopic orientation of the extendedchain crystals depends on the orientation imparted by flow during processing (molding,
extrusion, etc.). Because of the fibrous nature of the extended-chain crystals, these plastics
behave as “self-reinforced composites,” with excellent mechanical properties, at least in
the chain direction. This is illustrated in Table 4.3 for molded specimens of a liquidcrystalline copolyester of ethylene glycol, terephthalic acid, and p-hydroxybenzoic
acid [14]. In the direction parallel to the flow, the properties listed in Table 4.3 favorably
compare with ordinary crystalline thermoplastics (nylons, polyesters) reinforced with up to
30% glass fibers.
TABLE 4.3 Properties of a Molded Liquid-Crystalline Copolyester [14]

Tensile strength, MPa
Elongation, %
Flexural modulus, GPa
Linear coefficient of expansion,  C1

|| to Flow

? to Flow

107
8
11.8
0

28.4
10
1.67
4.5  105

PROBLEMS

59

It is obvious from the repeat units above that the liquid-crystalline behavior is promoted
by highly aromatic chains. The phenyl rings inhibit rotation, resulting in stiff, rigid,
extended chains, and because they are nearly planar, they stack next to one another,
promoting long-range order in both the liquid and the solid states.
Thermotropic and lyotropic liquid crystals behave in a reversible manner as the
temperature and the solvent are changed, respectively. The crystals change their alignment from highly ordered to amorphous as the crystals reversibly come apart and reform.
These kinds of polymer crystals have found wide usage in electronics, in the form of liquid
crystal displays (LCDs). Here, the crystallinity can be switched on and off thermally,
electrically, or by a change in solution properties. Taking advantage of the opaque/
transparent transition as polymers change from crystalline to amorphous, a display either
allows or prevents viewing a backlit display (or alternately change the pattern of reflected
light, as in many calculators).

PROBLEMS
1

Derive Equation 4.1.

2

X-ray diffraction measurements show that polyethylene crystallizes in a bodycentered orthorhombic unit cell with lattice parameters a ¼ 0.7417 nm, b ¼ 0.4945
nm, and c ¼ 0.2547 nm at 25  C. The a, b, and c axes are orthogonal. The chain axes
run in the c direction and there are two repeating units per unit cell (one running up the
center and one-quarter in each of the four corners). Calculate the crystal density of
polyethylene.

3

The density of amorphous polyethylene is estimated to be 0.855 g/cm3 at 25 oC by
extrapolating values from above the melting point. Use this value and your answer to
Problem 4.2 to estimate
(a) the degree of crystallinity of a 0.93 g/cm3 polyethylene sample, and
(b) the density of a 72% crystalline polyethylene sample.

4

Suppose that you know the theoretical enthalpy of melting for a 100% crystalline
polymer. Show how you could obtain the degree of crystallinity for an actual sample
by measuring its enthalpy of melting.

5

The entry in Table 4.1 “Branching, equivalent CH3 groups/1000 C atoms” is determined
by calculating that number for a sample of poly(ethylene-co-propylene) with the same
density. How many CH3 groups are there per 1000 main-chain C atoms in a 65

60

POLYMER MORPHOLOGY

(weight)% ethylene-35% propylene copolymer? This copolymer, ethylene–propylene
rubber (EPR) is completely amorphous. (Note: You may ignore the ends of the chains.)
6

Traditional introductory materials science texts, concerned mostly with metals and
ceramics, devote considerable space to crystal structures and crystal defects. These
topics have been studied for polymers, but they are hardly mentioned here. Why are
they much less important in polymers?

7

Equation 4.1 relates the density of a (semi)crystalline polymer to its composition and
the densities of the individual phases. Develop two simple models that relate the
tensile modulus of a crystalline polymer, E, to the moduli of the individual phases, Ec
and Ea. The densities of each phase are known, as are the % crystallinity. Base each
model on a layered structure of the two phases (OK, so this is pretty naive). In one, the
layers are assumed to be perpendicular to the applied stress and in the other they are
assumed to be parallel.

8

Both Kevlar (Section 4.7) and extended-chain linear polyethylene (Section 4.2) fibers
contain a high degree of extended-chain crystallinity, yet the former is somewhat
stronger than the latter. Why?

9

Nylon 6/6 (Chapter 2, Example 4E) is opaque when pure. However, if isophthalic acid (a
diacid in which the two acid groups are arranged in meta positions on a phenyl ring) is
substituted for the adipic acid, the resulting polymer is transparent. Explain.

10

Two perfectly transparent polymers are physically mixed. The resulting mixture is also
perfectly transparent. What does this mean? Hint: There is more than one possibility.

REFERENCES
[1] Schultz, J.M., Polymer Material Science, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1974.
[2] Wunderlich, B., Macromolecular Physics, Vol. 1, Crystal Structure, Morphology, Defects,
Academic, New York, 1973.
[3] Tadukoru, H. Structure of Crystalline Polymers, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1979.
[4] Mandlekern, L. Chapter 4 in Physical Properties of Polymers, American Chemical Society,
Washington, DC, 1984.
[5] Bovey, F.A., Chapter 5 in Macromolecules: An Introduction to Polymer Science, F.A. Boveyand
F.H. Winslow (eds), Academic, New York, 1979.
[6] Geil, P.H., Polymer Single Crystals, Interscience, New York, 1963.
[7] Oppenlander, G.C., Science 159, 1311 (1968).
[8] Southern, J.H. and R.S. Porter, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 14, 2305 (1970); J. Macromol. Sci. Phys.
B4, 541 (1970).
[9] Kavesh, S. and D.C. Prevorsek, U.S. Patent 4,413,110.
[10] Pennings, A.J., J. Polym. Sci. (Symposia) 59, 55 (1977).
[11] Weiss, R.A. and C.K. Ober (eds), Liquid-Crystalline Polymers, American Chemical Society,
Washington, DC, 1990.
[12] Blumstein, A. (ed.) Liquid Crystalline Order in Polymers, Academic, New York, 1978.
[13] DuPont product literature.
[14] Menges, G. and G. Hahn, Modern Plastics, October 1981, p. 56.

CHAPTER 5

CHARACTERIZATION OF
MOLECULAR WEIGHT

5.1

INTRODUCTION

With the exception of a few naturally occurring polymers (such as proteins and DNA), all
polymers consist of molecules with a distribution of chain lengths. Compared to molecules
such as water that have a definite structure (H2O) and molecular weight (18), the polymer
chains making up a sample consist of molecules with a range of molecular weights. For
example, poly(ethylene glycol) or PEG is often used at a range of molecular weights,
around 400 (which is actually just an oligomer of approximately nine repeat units), PEG is
a viscous liquid, while with increasing molecular weight, PEG becomes waxy (around
600), and can be formed into a solid powder (around 3000). Because the molecular weight
is strongly related to the mechanical and chemical properties of polymers, it is necessary to
characterize the entire distribution quantitatively, or at least to define and measure average
chain lengths or molecular weights for these materials. Extensive reviews are available [1,2] concerning the effects of molecular weight and its distribution on the mechanical
properties of polymers.
First, the molecular weight of a single polymer chain, M, is easily calculated, if the chain
length, x, and chemical composition of the repeat unit (and thus the molecular weight of the
repeat unit, Mr) are known:
M ¼ xMr

ð5:1Þ

Note that the terms chain length and degree of polymerization can be used interchangeably,
and both are represented by x.
When considering a collection of polymer chains, an average molecular weight must
be considered. However, the method for determining this average depends on how you
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

61

62

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

count. In normal averaging (e.g., your grades in a class), you sum up each of the
individual chain molecular weights (or scores) and divide by the number of chains (or
assignments):
M ¼ W=N ¼ Total weight = Total number of chains

ð5:2Þ

This is a perfectly valid way to calculate molecular weight, but we must consider statistics
and distribution patterns to get a more accurate picture of how polymers behave, so this
chapter will discuss different ways of calculating molecular weights, introduce distribution
profiles, and discuss laboratory methods used to measure or estimate the average molecular
weight of polymer samples.
5.2

AVERAGE MOLECULAR WEIGHTS

Since nearly every collection of polymer molecules contains a distribution of molecular
 n may be defined in an analogous fashion
weights, a number-average molecular weight M
to Equation 5.3:
1
P

nx M x
1  
X
W x¼1
n1 M1 n2 M2
nx

Mn ¼ ¼ 1
¼ P þ P þ  ¼
Mx
P
nx
nx
N
N
x¼1
nx

ð5:3Þ

x¼1

where

W ¼ total sample weight ¼
wx ¼ total weight of x-mer

1
X

wx ¼

x¼1

1
X

nx Mx

x¼1

N ¼ total number of moles in the sample ðof all sizesÞ ¼
nx ¼ number of moles of x-mer
Mx ¼ molecular weight of x-mer
ðnx =NÞ ¼ mole fraction of x-mer

1
X

nx

x¼1

Although this equation appears complicated, if you work with it, you will see that it reduces
to the common equation used to average grades, except that it gives the average length of all
the chains in a polymer sample. Any analytical technique that determines the number of
moles present in a sample of known weight, regardless of their size, will give the numberaverage molecular weight.
Rather than count the number of molecules of each size present in a sample, it is possible
to define an average in terms of the weights of molecules present at each size level. This
 w places an emphasis on the larger
 w. M
is the weight-average molecular weight, M
molecular weight chains, which is particularly useful when considering the mechanical
properties of polymers, as the larger chains contribute more to a polymer’s strength than
smaller-sized chains.
Consider a bowl of fruit that contains three apples, five oranges, and a bunch of grapes. If
you consider each grape as a separate fruit, the average size (“number average molecular
weight”) will be much closer to the size of a grape, but the majority of the mass in the bowl

AVERAGE MOLECULAR WEIGHTS

63

is due to the larger apples and oranges, so a weight-average size will represent that the
larger fruits make up more of the mass. For a polymer, the weight-average molecular
 w , is
weight, M
P
P
X wx 
nx Mx2
w 1 M1 w 2 M2
 w ¼ Pwx Mx ¼ P
M
þ P þ  ¼
ð5:4Þ
Mx ¼ P
wx
wx
wx
nx M x
W
Analytical procedures that, in effect, determine the weight of molecules at a given size level
 n and would be
 w is greater than M
result in the weight-average molecular weight. Thus, M
closer to the size of the apples and oranges.
The number-average molecular weight is the first moment of the molecular weight
distribution, analogous to the center of gravity (the first moment of the mass distribution) in
mechanics. The weight-average molecular weight, the second moment of the distribution,
 z , the
corresponds to the radius of gyration in mechanics. Higher moments, for example, M
third moment, may also be defined and are used occasionally.
It is sometimes more convenient to represent the size of polymer molecules in terms
of the degree of polymerization or chain length x, rather than molecular weight, as
related by Equation 5.1. Thus, xn and xw can also be used to represent average polymer
sizes, and
Mx ¼ mx

ð5:5aÞ

 n ¼ m
M
xn

ð5:5bÞ

 w ¼ m
M
xw

ð5:5cÞ

where m ¼ molecular weight of a repeating unit (also sometimes called Mr)
xn ¼ number-average degree of polymerization or chain length
xw ¼ weight-average degree of polymerization or chain length
(These relations neglect the difference between the end groups on the molecule and
the repeating units. This is perfectly justifiable in most cases since the end groups are
an insignificant portion of a typical large polymer molecule.) It is also possible to use
these relations for copolymers, but m should be modified to reflect the average
composition of a repeat unit in the chain. In terms of chain lengths, Equations 5.3
and 5.4 become
P
nx x X nx 
¼
x
xn ¼ P
nx
N
P
nx x2 X wx 
¼
xw ¼ P
x
nx x
W

ð5:3aÞ
ð5:4aÞ

 n (
w  M
xw  xn ). The averages are equal only for a monodisperse
It may be shown that M
 n ¼ xw /
 w /M
xn is
polymer, where all of the chains are exactly the same length. The ratio M
known as the polydispersity index, PI. PI is a measure of the breadth of the molecular
weight distribution. A monodisperse sample would have a PI of 1.0, but typical values
range from about 1.02 for carefully fractionated polymers synthesized by anionic addition
reactions to over 50 for some commercial polymers.

64

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

Example 5.1 Measurements on two essentially monodisperse fractions of a linear
poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), A and B, yield molecular weights of 100,000 and
400 000, respectively. Mixture 1 is prepared from one part by weight of A and two parts by
weight of B. Mixture 2 contains two parts by weight of A and one of B. Determine the
weight- and number-average molecular weights of mixtures 1 and 2, as well as their
weight- and number-average degrees of polymerization. The repeat unit for PMMA is
CH2C(CH3)COOCH3, which has a molecular weight, m, of 100.
Solution. For mixture 1:
nA ¼

1
¼ 1  105
100 000

2
¼ 0:5  105
400 000
P
5
5
5
5
 n ¼ Pni Mi ¼ ð1  10 Þð10 Þ þ ð0:5  10 Þð4  10 Þ ¼ 2:0  105
M
ni
1  105 þ 0:5  105
P wi 
1
2
w ¼
M
Mi ¼ ð1  105 Þ þ ð4  105 Þ ¼ 3  105
W
3
3
nB ¼

For PMMA, m ¼ 100, thus
from Equations 5.5b and 5.5c:
 w =m ¼ 3:0  105 =100 ¼ 3:0  103
xw ¼ M
xn ¼ Mn =m ¼ 2:0  105 =100 ¼ 2:0  103
For mixture 2:
nA ¼

2
¼ 2  105
100 000

nB ¼

1
¼ 0:25  105
400 000

5
5
5
5
 n ¼ ð2  10 Þð10 Þ þ ð0:25  10 Þð4  10 Þ ¼ 1:33  105
M
5
5
2  10 þ 0:25  10

 w ¼ 2 ð1  105 Þ þ 1 ð4  105 Þ ¼ 2  105
M
3
3
Again, for PMMA, m ¼ 100, thus
 w =m ¼ 2  105 =100 ¼ 2:0  103
xw ¼ M
 n =m ¼ 1:33  105 =100 ¼ 1:33  103
xn ¼ M

AVERAGE MOLECULAR WEIGHTS

65

Example 5.2 Two polydisperse samples are mixed in equal weights. Sample A has
 n ¼ 100,000 and M
 w ¼ 200,000. Sample B has M
 n ¼ 200,000 and M
 w ¼ 400,000. What
M
 n and M
 w of the mixture?
are M
Solution. First, let us derive general expressions for calculating the averages of mixtures
X
Wi
i
n  W ¼ X
M
N
Ni
i

where subscript i refers to the various polydisperse components of the mixture. Now, for a
given component,
Wi
Ni ¼ 
M ni
X
Wi
i
 n ðmixtureÞ ¼ X
M
 ni Þ
ðWi =M
ð5:6Þ
i
!
X X
X
wx Mx
wx Mx
i
i
i
w ¼
X
¼
M
W
Wi
i

X
 wi ¼
M

!
wx Mx

x

Wi

i

0
1
X
 wi Wi Þ
ðM
X B wi C
B X CM
 wi
 w ðmixtureÞ ¼ i X
M
¼
@
Wi
Wi A
i
i

ð5:7Þ

i

where (wi/SWi) is the weight fraction of component i in this mixture. In this case, let
WA ¼ 1g and WB ¼ 1 g. Then
n ¼
M

WA þ WB
1þ1
 nA Þ þ ðWB =M
 nB ¼ ð1=105 Þ þ ð1=2  105 Þ ¼ 133;000
ðWA =M




WA
WB

 WB
M WA þ
M
WA þ WB
WA þ WB
 
 
1
1
5
2  10 þ
4  105 ¼ 300;000
¼
2
2

w ¼
M



Note that even though the polydispersity index of each component of the mixture is 2.0, the
PI of the mixture is greater, that is, 2.25.

66

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

TABLE 5.1 Methods of Determining Average Polymer Molecular Weights [5]
Method

Type of Molecular Weight Determined
n
M
n
M
n
M
n
M
w
M
w
M
v
M
 n ,M
 w , MWD, and PI
M

End group analysis
Boiling-point elevation
Freezing-point depression
Osmotic pressure
Light scattering
Ultracentrifugation (sedimentation)
Viscometry
Gel permeation chromatography

5.3

DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE MOLECULAR WEIGHTS

Everything would be quite easy if we knew the molecular weight of each chain in a polymer
sample, but this is quite difficult to determine. This challenge has led to the development of
several different techniques that attempt to measure or at least estimate the molecular
weight of polymers [3]. This section covers some of the more common ways to determine
molecular weight, including an overview of the operation of the instruments and (hopefully) giving an appreciation for the associated advantages and limitations.
In general, techniques for determination of average molecular weights fall into two
categories: absolute and relative. In the former, measured quantities are theoretically
related to the average molecular weight; in the latter, a quantity is measured that is in some
way related to the molecular weight, but the exact relation must be established by
calibration with one of the absolute methods.
Another important way to categorize these techniques is the type by which the average
 w (or a viscosity-average molecular weight, M
 v ).
 n or M
molecular weight is determined: M
 c , molecular weight between crosslinks, is only applicable
Another type of molecular weight, M
for polymer networks and is discussed in later chapters. The techniques covered in this chapter
are listed in Table 5.1, along with the type(s) of molecular weight determined by each.
5.3.1

Absolute Methods

These methods allow the determination of the total number of moles of chains in a sample,
N. If the total sample weight, W, is known,
n ¼ W
M
N

ð5:8Þ

5.3.1.1 End-Group Analysis If the chemical nature of the end groups on the polymer
chains is known (as in many condensation polymers), standard analytical techniques may
sometimes be employed to determine the concentration of the end groups and thereby of the
polymer molecules, giving directly the number-average molecular weight. For example, in
linear polyesters formed from a stoichiometrically equivalent batch of monomers, there are,
on average, one unreacted acid group and one unreacted OH group per molecule. These
groups may sometimes be analyzed by appropriate titration. If an addition polymer is known
to terminate by disproportionation (see Chapter 9), there will be one double bond for every

DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE MOLECULAR WEIGHTS

67

two polymer molecules, which may be detectable quantitatively by halogenation or by
infrared measurements. Other possibilities include the use of a radioactively tagged initiator
that remains attached to the end of each chain.
These methods have one drawback in addition to the necessity of knowing the nature of the
end groups. As the molecular weight increases, the concentration of end groups (number per
unit volume) decreases, and the measurement sensitivity drops off rapidly. For this reason,
 n <10,000.
these methods are generally limited to smaller polymers in the range of M
5.3.1.2 Colligative Property Measurements You may recall from an introductory
chemistry course that addition of salts to a liquid can lead to boiling-point elevation or
freezing-point depression. When a solute is added to a solvent, it causes a change in the
activity and chemical potential (partial molal Gibbs free energy) of the solvent. The magnitude
of the change is directly related to the solute concentration. For example, when pure water is
boiled, the chemical potentials of the liquid and the vapor in equilibrium with it are the
same. If, now, some salt is added to the water, it lowers the chemical potential of the liquid
water. To reestablish equilibrium with the pure water vapor above the salt solution, the
temperature of the system must be raised, causing a boiling-point elevation. In a similar
fashion, the addition of ethylene glycol antifreeze depresses the freezing point of water.
Freezing-point depression, boiling-point elevation, and, a third technique, osmotic
pressure, may be used to determine the number of moles of polymer per unit volume of
solution and thereby establish the number-average molecular weight. The following are the
relevant thermodynamic equations for the three techniques:
lim

DTb
RT 2
¼
n
c!0 c
rDHv M

ðboiling-point elevationÞ

ð5:9Þ

DTf
RT 2
¼
n
c!0 c
rDHf M

ðfreezing-point depressionÞ

ð5:10Þ

lim

p RT
¼ 
c!0 c
Mn
lim

ðosmotic pressureÞ

ð5:11Þ

where
c ¼ solute (polymer concentration), mass/volume
T ¼ absolute temperature
R ¼ gas constant
DHv ¼ solvent enthalpy of vaporization
DHv ¼ solvent enthalpy of fusion
DTb ¼ boiling-point elevation
DTf ¼ freezing-point depression
p ¼ osmotic pressure
r ¼ density
It is important to note that the thermodynamic equations apply only for ideal solutions, a
condition that can be reached only in the limit of infinite dilution of the solute. For real
situations, a dilute solution can be assumed in most cases if the concentration, c, is less than
1 wt%. It should also be noted that for these techniques to work, the polymer must be fully
dissolved in a good solvent, whereas polymers precipitate in a bad solvent. If not dilute enough,

68

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

FIGURE 5.1 (a) Dilute polymer chains that have no interchain interactions (though they may have
intrachain interactions), and (b) concentrated polymer solution showing significant interchain interactions.

polymer chains may interact in the solution (Figure 5.1), causing serious error in molecular
weight estimation. In each of these equations, data collected for different concentrations can be
 n.
plotted versus concentration, with the value at c ¼ 0 used to determine M
Freezing-point depression and boiling-point elevation require precise measurements of
very small temperature differences. Although they are used occasionally, the difficulties
involved have prevented their widespread application. For example, a D Tf of 0.0002  C
might be the only observed change for a polymer with molecular weight 25,000. Osmotic
 n. A
pressure, on the other hand, is the most common absolute method of determining M
schematic diagram of an osmometer is shown in Figure 5.2. The solution and solvent
chambers are separated by a “semipermeable” membrane, one that ideally allows passage

FIGURE 5.2 Schematic diagram of an osmometer.

DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE MOLECULAR WEIGHTS

69

of solvent molecules but not solute molecules. The solvent flows through the membrane to
dilute the solution. This is a natural consequence of the tendency of the system to increase
its entropy, which is accomplished by the dilution of the solution. This dilution continues
until the tendency toward further dilution is counterbalanced by the increased pressure in
the solution chamber. At this point, the chemical potential of the solvent is the same in both
chambers and the pressure difference between the chambers is the osmotic pressure, p. By
making measurements at several concentrations, plotting (p/c) versus c and extrapolating
to zero concentration, the number-average molecular weight is established through
Equation 5.11.
One of the major difficulties with membrane osmometry is finding suitable semipermeable membranes. Ordinary cellophane or modifications of it are commonly used.
Unfortunately, if the membrane is sufficiently tight to prevent the passage of low molecular
weight chains, the rate of solvent passage is slow and it takes longer to reach equilibrium. In
practice, all membranes allow some of the low molecular weight polymer in a distribution
to sneak through. Also, as the average molecular weight increases, p increases, so the
measurement precision also decreases. These factors usually limit the applicability of
 n < 1,000,000.
osmometry to 50,000 < M
High-speed, automated membrane osmometers monitor the fluid volume in one of the
chambers and externally apply the osmotic pressure to the solution chamber to prevent
flow. Since no flow through the membrane is necessary, they can reduce measurement time
from days to hours or even minutes.
A related colligative technique is vapor-pressure osmometry. Two thermistors are
placed in a carefully thermostatted chamber that contains a pure-solvent reservoir so that
the atmosphere is saturated with solvent vapor. A drop of solvent is placed on one
thermistor and a drop of polymer solution is placed on the other. Because of the solvent’s
lower chemical potential in the solution, solvent vapor condenses on the solution drop,
giving up its heat of condensation, warming the solution drop relative to the pure solvent
drop. In principle, the equilibrium DT is thermodynamically related to the molar solution
 n . In practice, heat losses (mainly along
concentration, thereby allowing calculation of M
the thermistor leads) require that the instrument be calibrated for precise results, really
making it a relative technique (as opposed to absolute). On a routine basis, commercial
 n values of 40,000–50,000 [4].
instruments are probably limited to maximum M
5.3.1.3 Weight-Average Techniques The absolute techniques discussed to this
point establish the number of molecules present per unit volume of solution, regardless of
their size or shape. Other methods measure quantities that are related to the average mass of
the molecules in solution, thereby giving the weight-average molecular weight. One of
the more common of these is light scattering, which is based on the fact that the intensity
of light scattered by a polymer molecule is proportional, among other things, to the square
of its mass. A light-scattering photometer measures the intensity of scattered light as a
function of the scattering angle (Figure 5.3). Measurements are made at several
concentrations. By a double extrapolation to zero angle and zero concentration (known
as Zimm plot) and with a knowledge of the dependence of the solution refractive index
 w is established. This technique also provides information on the
versus concentration, M
solvent–polymer interaction and on the configuration of the polymer molecules in solution,
since the quantitative nature of the scattering depends also on the size of the particles. Light
 w < 10,000,000. The
scattering is generally applicable over a wider range 10,000 < M
weight-average molecular weight can also be obtained with an ultracentrifuge, which
distributes the molecules according to their mass in a centrifugal force field.

70

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

FIGURE 5.3

 w of polymers in dilute solution.
Light-scattering experiment to determine M

It must be noted that for light-scattering and sedimentation (by ultracentrifuge)
techniques (as well as most relative methods, below) to give an accurate measurement
of molecular weight, dilute solutions are required. If two polymer molecules are entangled,
they will appear as a single molecule and skew the results to higher molecular weights (that
is why many techniques extrapolate to zero concentration).
5.3.2

Relative Methods

The molecular weight determination techniques discussed to this point allow direct
calculation of the average molecular weight from experimentally measured quantities
through known theoretical relations. Sometimes, however, these relations are not known,
and although something is measured that is known to be related to molecular weight, one of
the absolute methods above must be used to calibrate the technique.
A case in point is solution viscosity. It has long been known that relatively small
amounts of dissolved polymer could cause tremendous increases in viscosity (ever made
Jell-O ?). It is logical to assume that, other things being equal, larger molecules will
impede flow more than smaller ones and give a higher solution viscosity. The solution
viscosity will also depend on the solvent viscosity, temperature, solute concentration, as
well as the particular polymer and solvent, because the interactions between the polymer
and the solvent influence the conformation of the polymer molecules in solution and
entanglements between the polymer molecules. In functional form, we may write
h ¼ h (hs, T, polymer, solvent, c, entanglements, M)
where h ¼ solution viscosity
hs ¼ pure solvent viscosity
We can get rid of the effect of solvent viscosity by calculating the fractional increase in
viscosity caused by the added solute (polymer) through the specific viscosity hsp:
h  ns
h
¼  1 ¼ hr  1
ð5:12Þ
hsp ¼
hs
hs
where hr ¼ h/hs is known as the relative viscosity. Similarly, we can normalize for
concentration by dividing the specific viscosity by concentration to get the reduced
viscosity, hred:
hsp ðh=hs Þ  1
¼
hred ¼
ð5:13Þ
c
c
To get rid of the influence of entanglements on viscosity, we extrapolate the reduced
viscosity to zero concentration to get the intrinsic viscosity [h]:
½h ¼ lim

c!0

ðh=hs Þ  1
c

ð5:14Þ

DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE MOLECULAR WEIGHTS

71

The intrinsic viscosity, then, should be a function of the molecular weight of the polymer in
solution, the polymer–solvent system, and the temperature. If measurements are made at
constant temperature using a specified solvent for a particular polymer, it should be
quantitatively related to the polymer’s molecular weight.
Huggins proposed a relation between reduced viscosity and concentration for dilute
polymer solutions (hr < 2):
hsp
¼ ½h þ k0 ½h2 c
c

ðHuggins equationÞ

ð5:15Þ

Interesting enough, k’ turns out to be approximately equal to 0.4 for a variety of polymer–
solvent systems, providing a convenient means of estimating dilute solution viscosity
versus concentration if the intrinsic viscosity is known. By expanding the natural logarithm
in the definition of inherent viscosity, hinh, into a power series it may be shown that an
equivalent form of the Huggins equation is
hinh ¼

lnhr
¼ ½h þ k00 ½h2 c
c

ð5:16Þ

where k00 ¼ k0  0:5
Equation From 5.14 it is seen that an alternative definition of intrinsic viscosity is


lnðh=hs Þ
ð5:17Þ
½h ¼ lim hinb ¼ lim
c!0
c!0
c
Plots of the reduced and inherent viscosities are linear with concentration, at least at low
concentrations, in accord with Equations 5.16 and 5.17, and have a common intercept, the
intrinsic viscosity (Figure 5.4). Exceptions occur with polyelectrolytes, where the degree of
ionization and, therefore, the chemical nature of the polymer changes with concentration.
Note that the intrinsic viscosity has dimensions of reciprocal concentration. For some
strange reason, concentrations were traditionally given in g/dL (¼100 mL), although g/mL
is now becoming more common. In fact, the relative, specific, reduced, intrinsic, and
inherent viscosities are not true viscosities, and do not have dimensions of viscosity. More
appropriate terminology has been proposed, but not widely adopted. Table 5.2 summarizes
the various quantities defined and typical units.
0.9
Polymethyl methacrylate
in acetone, 30 ºC

hred and hmh (dL/g)

0.8

hred

0.7
0.6
[h]

hmh

0.5
0.4

0.1

0.3

0.5

0.7

0.9

1.1

1.3

1.5

Concentration (g/dL)

FIGURE 5.4

Plot to determine intrinsic viscosity (Example 5.3).

72

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

TABLE 5.2 Solution Viscosity Terminology [5]
Common
Units

Common Name

h
hs
hr ¼ h=hs
hsp ¼ ðh  hs Þ=hs ¼ hr  1
hred ¼ hsp =c ¼ hr  1=c
hinh ¼ lnðhr Þ=c

Centipoise
Centipoise
Dimensionless
Dimensionless
dL/g
dL/g

Solution viscosity
Solvent viscosity
Relative viscosity
Specific viscosity
Reduced viscosity
Inherent viscosity

½h ¼ lim hred ¼ lim hinh

dL/g

Intrinsic viscosity

Quantity

c!0

c!0

Recommended
Name
Solution viscosity
Solvent viscosity
Viscosity ratio
–
Viscosity number
Logarithmic
viscosity number
Limiting viscosity
number

Now that the intrinsic viscosity has been established, how is it related to molecular
weight? Studies of the intrinsic viscosity of essentially monodisperse polymer fractions
whose molecular weights have been established by one of the absolute methods indicate a
rather simple relation (Figure 5.5):
½hx ¼ KðMx Þa

ð0:5 < a < 1Þ

ð5:18Þ

where the subscript x refers to a monodisperse sample of a particular molecular weight.
Equation 5.18 is known as the Mark–Houwink–Sakurada (MHS) relation.
What about an unfractionated, polydisperse sample? Experimentally, the measured
intrinsic viscosity of a mixture of monodisperse fractions is a weight average
P
½h wx X wx 
ð5:19Þ
½h ¼ P x ¼
½hx
wx
W

C6H12
30º
[h]

1.0
DIB 20º

0.1
104

105
M

106

FIGURE 5.5 Intrinsic viscosity-molecular weight relations for polyisobutylene in cyclohexane at
30  C and diisobutylene at 20  C. Reprinted from P.J. Flsory, Principles of Polymer Chemistry.
Copyright 1953 by Cornell University. Used by permission of Cornell University Press.

DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE MOLECULAR WEIGHTS

73

 v , is defined in terms of this measured intrinsic
A viscosity-average molecular weight, M
viscosity as
(P
)
P a
 1=a P a
ð1þaÞ
1=a
1=a
M
M
n
½h
w
n
M
M
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
v ¼
P
P
M
¼
¼
¼
ð5:20Þ
n x Mx
nx M x
W
K
v < M
 w , but M
 v is closer to M
 w than M
 n . If the
n < M
With 0.5 < a < 1.0 for polymers, M
molecular weight distribution of a series of samples does not differ too much, that is, if the
ratios of the various averages remain nearly the same, approximate equations of the type
 w )a0 may be applicable.
[h] ¼ K0 (M
 v if it is different from either of the molecular weight
Why bother with calculating M
 w )? Viscosity is an easily measured
 n and M
averages that we defined (Eqs 5.3 and 5.4 for M

property of polymer solutions, and M v can be used for quality control in polymerization
processes, so it is still quite useful.
Example 5.3 The following data were obtained for a sample of poly(methyl methacrylate),
PMMA, in acetone at 30  C:
hr

c (g/100 mL)

1.170
1.215
1.629
1.892

0.275
0.344
0.896
1.199

 v )0.72. Determine [h] and M
 v for the
For PMMA in acetone at 30  C, [h] ¼ 5.83  105 (M
0
sample and K , the constant in the Huggins equation.
Solution. For the data above, calculations give
hsp

hred (dL/g)

ln hr

hinh (dL/g)

0.170
0.215
0.629
0.892

0.618
0.625
0.702
0.744

0.157
0.195
0.488
0.638

0.571
0.567
0.545
0.532

In Figure 5.4, hred and hinh are plotted against concentration and extrapolated to a common
intercept at zero concentration, the intrinsic viscosity, [h] ¼ 0.580 dL/g.

v ¼
M



½h
5:83  105

1=0:72


¼

0:580
5:83  105

1:39
¼ 357; 000

The regression slope of the upper line is 0.137. From Equation 5.17, k0 ¼ slope/[h]2
¼ 0.408 (dimensionless).

74

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

 v for mixtures 1 and 2 in
Example 5.4 For the PMMA fractions in Example 5.1, calculate M
 n and M
 w (a is given in Example 5.3).
acetone at 30  C and compare with M
Solution. From Equation 5.20, for mixture 1:
(
nP w  o1=a
1
x
a
v ¼
M
¼
ð1  105 Þ0:72
Mx
W
3
2
þ ð4  105 Þ0:72
3
In mixture 2:

(
v ¼
M

¼ 288; 000

 n ¼ 200; 000
M
 w ¼ 300; 000
M

¼ 187; 000

 n ¼ 133; 000
M

Mw ¼ 200; 000

1=0:72

2
ð1  105 Þ0:72
3

1
þ ð4  105 Þ0:72
3

1=0:72

Viscosities for molecular weight determination are usually measured in glass capillary
viscometers, in which the solution flows through a capillary under its own head. Two
common types, the Ostwald and Ubbelohde, are sketched in Figure 5.6. (Since polymer
solutions are non-Newtonian, intrinsic viscosity must be defined, strictly speaking, in terms
of the zero-shear or lower-Newtonian viscosity (see Chapter 14). This is rarely a problem,
because the low shear rates in the usual glassware viscometers give just that. Occasionally,
however, extrapolation to zero-shear conditions is required.)
In these types of viscometers, fluid is drawn up through a capillary into bulbs, with
timing lines marked on the glass. As the fluid flows back down through the capillary (the

FIGURE 5.6 Dilute-solution viscometers: (a) Ostwald; (b) Ubbelohde.

75

MOLECULAR WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS

TABLE 5.3 K and a Values of the MHS Equation for Selected Polymer–Solvent
Systems [6]
Polymer
Polystyrene, PS
Poly(methyl methacrylate)
Atactic polypropylene
Poly(vinyl alcohol)
Poly(vinyl chloride)
Poly(vinyl chloride)

Solvent

Temperature

K (103 mL/g)

a

Tetrahydrofuran, THF
Acetone
Benzene
Water
THF
THF



11.0
5.83
27.0
20.0
16.3
63.8

0.725
0.720
0.71
0.76
0.766
0.65

22 C
30  C
25  C
25  C
25  C
30  C

right side of both viscometers in Figure 5.6), the flow time is recorded. These flow times are
related to the viscosity by an equation of the form
h
b
¼ v ¼ at þ
r
t

ð5:21Þ

where a and b are instrument constants (found through calibration), r is the solution
density, and n is the kinematic viscosity (with typical units of cm2/s). The last term (b/t), the
kinetic energy correction, is generally negligible for flow times of over a minute, and since
the densities of the dilute polymer solutions differ little from that of the solvent, the ratio of
the viscosity of the polymer solution to the solvent viscosity can be approximated by the
flow times recorded for these solutions, respectively:
h
hs

t
ts

ð5:22Þ

The Ubbelohde viscometer has the distinct advantage that the driving fluid head is
independent of the amount of solution in it; hence, dilution can be carried out right in
the instrument.
The equipment necessary for intrinsic viscosity determination is inexpensive, and the
measurements straightforward and rapid. The MHS constants K and a in Equations 5.18
and 5.20 are extensively tabulated for a wide variety of polymer–solvent systems and
temperatures (Table 5.3) [6]. Even more simple devices (such as cup viscometers–which
are metal cups with fixed holes in the bottom) are commonly used in industry for rapid
viscosity estimation, this is particularly true in paint formulations. Automated viscometers,
such as rotational viscometers, are also commonly used in analytical laboratories and offer
rapid and accurate results.
5.4

MOLECULAR WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS

Before continuing to one additional molecular weight characterization technique (gel
permeation chromatography), let us delve a bit deeper into the concept of molecular weight
distributions. A typical synthetic polymer might consist of a mixture of molecules with
degrees of polymerization x ranging from one to perhaps millions. The complete molecular
weight distribution specifies the mole (number) or mass (weight) fraction of molecules at
each size level in a sample. (Actually, moles or masses could be specified, but they vary
linearly with sample size, that is, are extensive quantities, while the mole or mass fractions
are intensive, independent of sample size, and are therefore preferable.)

76

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

1 or m

Fraction
x-Mer
nx

–––
N 
or
wx

–––
W
x or Mx

FIGURE 5.7 Molecular weight distributions illustrating the actual discrete distribution and the
usual continuous approximation to it.

Distributions are often presented in the form of a plot of mole (nx/N) or mass (wx/W)
fraction of x-mer versus either chain length, x, or chain mass, Mx. Since x and Mx differ by
a constant factor, the molecular weight of the repeating unit Mr (Eq. 5.1), it makes little
difference which is used. Because x can assume only integral values, a true distribution
must consist of a series of spikes, one at each integral value of x, or separated by Mr
molecular weight units if plotted against Mx. The height of the spike represents the mole or
mass fraction of that particular x-mer. No analytical technique is capable of resolving the
individual x-mers, so distributions are drawn (and represented mathematically) as continuous curves, drawn through the tops of the spikes as sketched in Figure 5.7.
The averages may be calculated from either the mole- or the mass-fraction distributions.
For continuous distributions, the summations in Equations 5.3 and 5.4 must be replaced by
the corresponding integrals (the subscript x has been dropped for clarity and because of the
continuous nature of the distributions).
From the mole (number)-fraction distribution (n/N),
ð1
ð1
nM dM
ðn=NÞM dM
 n ¼ First moment ¼ ð0 1
¼ 0ð 1
ð5:23Þ
M
n dM
ðn=NÞdM
0

 n ¼ m
Since M
xn and M ¼ mx:
xn ¼

ð1  
n
x dx
N
0

0

ð5:24Þ

n
Note that the integrals replace the summation symbols used in the definition of M
(Eq. 5.3). Also,
ð1  
n
dx ¼ 1
ð5:25Þ
N
0

MOLECULAR WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS

77

that is, the mole fractions must sum to 1. Also,
ð1
 w ¼ Second moment ¼ ð01
M

ð1

nM dM
2

nM dM

ðn=NÞM 2 dM

¼ ð01

0

ðn=NÞM dM

ð5:26Þ

0

 w ¼ m
xw ,
And, since M
ð1

ðn=NÞx2 dx

xw ¼ ð01

ðn=NÞx dx

ð
1 1 n 2
¼
x dx
xn 0 N

ð5:27Þ

0

If the mass (weight)-fraction distribution (w/W) is known, the average molecular weights
and chain lengths can be determined:
ð1

ð1

ð1

nM dM
w dM
ðw=WÞdM
 n ¼ ð0 1
M
¼ ð1 0
¼ ð1 0
n dM
ðw=MÞdM
ð1=MÞðw=WÞdM
0

0

ð5:28Þ

0

ð1

ðw=WÞdx
xn ¼ ð 1 0
ð1=xÞðw=WÞdx

ð5:29Þ

0

ð1
 w ¼ ð01
M
0

nM 2 dM
nM dM

ð1

ðnMÞM dM

¼ 0ð 1

ðnMÞdM

0

ð1

wM dM

¼ ð0 1

ð1

ðw=WÞM dM
¼ 0ð 1
w dM
ðw=WÞdM

0

ð5:30Þ

0

ð1  
w
x dx
W
0

ð5:31Þ

ð1  
w
dx ¼ 1
W
0

ð5:32Þ

xw ¼
Note that

that is, the mass fractions must sum to 1.

78

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

Given the mole (number)-fraction distribution, the mass (weight)-fraction distribution
 n (Eq. 5.3),
may be calculated, and vice versa. Since w ¼ nM and, by definition of M
 n,
W ¼ NM
w
M n
x n
¼
¼
W Mn N
xn N

ð5:33Þ

Example 5.5 One analytic representation of a distribution of chain lengths that finds some
practical application (as we will see later) is
n
1
¼ eðx=cÞ
N C
where C is a constant.
(a) Determine xn for this distribution.
xn , for this distribution.
(b) Determine xw and the polydispersity index, PI ¼ xw /
(c) Obtain the expression for the weight-fraction distribution (w/W).
(d) Sketch the number- and weight-fraction distributions in the form of (n/N) xn and
xn .
(w/W) xn versus x/
Solution.
(a)

ð
ð1  
n
1 1 x=c
xe
dx
x dx ¼
xn ¼
N
C 0
0

Fortunately, for most of us, the above definite integral is tabulated in standard references.
The result is
xn ¼ C
(b)

ð
ð
1 1 n 2
1 1 2 x=xn
xw ¼
xe
dx
x dx ¼ 2
xn 0
xn 0 N

This integral is also tabulated, and gives the simple result
xw ¼ 2 xn
that is, PI ¼ xw /
xn ¼ 2 for this distribution.
(c)
w n x
x
¼
¼ 2 ex=xn
W
N xn xn
(d) The distributions are shown in Figure 5.8. Note that while the number of molecules
decreases exponentially with x, the weight of a molecule increases linearly with x. The
weight fraction therefore goes through a maximum in this case.
This distribution is derived for a particular kind of polymerization reaction in Chapter 9.

GEL PERMEATION (OR SIZE-EXCLUSION) CHROMATOGRAPHY (GPC, SEC)

79

1.0
.9
.8

 N–  –x n = exp −x–x n
n

.7
.6

–
xn

.5

–
xw

.4

–

W–  –x n =  –x n  exp −xx n
w

.3

x

.2
.1
0

FIGURE 5.8

x–
xn
0

1

2

3

Molecular weight distribution of Example 5.5 plotted in reduced form.

5.5 GEL PERMEATION (OR SIZE-EXCLUSION)
CHROMATOGRAPHY (GPC, SEC) [7]
Until fairly recently, the approximate molecular weight distribution of a polymer could be
determined only by laborious fractionation of the sample according to molecular weight
followed by determination of the molecular weights of the individual fractions with one of
the techniques previously discussed. The bases for these fractionation techniques are
discussed in Chapter 7. Suffice it to say that they tend to be difficult and time-consuming
and so, in general, are avoided whenever possible.
Now, however, gel permeation chromatography (GPC, also known as size-exclusion
chromatography, SEC) has been firmly established as a means of rapidly determining
 w, M
 z ) and the corresponding distributions. GPC makes
 n, M
molecular weight averages (M
use of a column, or series of columns, packed with particles of a porous substrate (known as
the stationary phase). The term gel in gel-permeation chromatography refers to a crosslinked polymer that is swollen by the solvent used. This is perhaps the most common type
of substrate, but others, for example, porous glass beads, are also used. The column is
maintained at a constant temperature, and the solvent (known as the mobile phase) is
passed through it at a constant rate. At the start of a run, a small amount of polymer solution
is injected into the flowing mobile phase just before it enters the column. The solvent flow
carries the polymer through the column. The smaller molecules in the sample have easy
access to the substrate pores and diffuse in and out of the pores, creating a highly tortuous,
lengthy pathway from the entrance to the exit from the column. The larger polymer chains
simply cannot fit into the pores in the stationary phase and pass around the outside, and

80

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

because they have a shorter pathway from entrance to exit, they elute from the column first.
Thus, polymer chains of different molecular weights are effectively separated, with the
molecular weight of the chains exiting the column decreasing with time.
A concentration-sensitive detector is placed at the outlet of the column. The most
common detector is a differential refractometer (which measures the difference in refractive
index between the pure solvent and that of the eluting fluid, containing the polymer), but
ultraviolet (UV) or infrared (IR) detectors are also useful as long as the polymer has a
functional group that can be detected in these light ranges. Regardless of the type of detector,
it is essential that it measure some quantity Q that is proportional to the mass concentration of
polymer at the column outlet (Q must be independent of M):
Q ¼ kc

ð5:34Þ

where Q ¼ detector readout
k ¼ proportionality constant
c ¼ mass concentration of polymer (g/cm3)
Thus, a GPC curve consists of a plot of Q (usually in arbitrary scale divisions, but related
to the quantity of chains eluting at a particular time) versus v, the volume of solvent that has
passed through the detector since sample injection, called elution or retention volume. The
x-axis can easily be converted to time by dividing the elution volume by the volumetric
flow rate of the solvent.
An example of a GPC curve is shown in Figure 5.9. Such a curve is often immediately
useful for quality-control purposes, as the width of the distribution indicates sample
polydispersity. The graph can also be compared directly to the graph for a known standard
material, revealing a quick qualitative comparison. This may be enough to take corrective
action in processing, but the usefulness of GPC extends well beyond qualitative comparisons, because, with appropriate calibration, it can determine all types of average molecular
 w, M
 z ), and the PI of polymer samples. An additional benefit is that GPC
 n, M
weights (M
can also be useful in detecting small molecular weight impurities or additives (such as
plasticizers or stabilizers––see Chapter 18). These materials show up as peaks at the low
molecular weight (high v or long t) end of the spectrum.
GPC chromatograms might look like one of the curves plotted in Figure 5.9. Nearly
monodisperse polystyrene standards are used to calibrate a GPC. If run through the column
as a mixture, the elution curve will show sharp peaks for each molecular weight standard,
with the highest molecular weight eluting first. After the column has been calibrated,
polymers with unknown molecular weight distributions can be tested. In Figure 5.9, one
sample with two narrowly dispersed samples are shown in curve B (note that the curves do
not overlap and that the area under the curves is proportional to the amount of polymer of
each molecular weight), while a mixture of highly polydisperse polymer samples will have
very broad peaks that overlap (curve C).
The total area under a chromatographic peak is proportional to the amount (mass) of
polymer eluted. Thus, for polymer mixtures, it is possible to use GPC to estimate the weight
fractions of different components, as long as their peaks do not overlap on the elution (x) axis.
It should be emphasized that GPC requires dilute solutions, so that each polymer
molecule passes through the porous stationary phase with no entanglements. Because the
hydrodynamic volume occupied by grafted or branched polymers is somewhat less than
that occupied by a linear polymer with the same molecular weight, GPC typically
 w for nonlinear polymers.
 n and M
underpredicts M

GEL PERMEATION (OR SIZE-EXCLUSION) CHROMATOGRAPHY (GPC, SEC)

81

FIGURE 5.9 A depiction of typical results from GPC. Three GPC chromatograms showing the
refractive index (which is proportional to the quantity of sample eluted) against elution volume for (a)
four monodisperse polystyrene standards used to calibrate the GPC, (b) a sample that contains a 2:1
 w 80,000 and 20,000, and (c) a sample that
polymer blend of narrowly disperse polymers with M
 w 80,000 and 20,000. The
contains a 1:1 polymer blend of widely polydisperse polymer sample M
elution volumes match the calibration curve shown in Figure 5.10.

Conventional GPC is a relative method. Thus, to provide quantitative results, the
relation between M and v (or elution time, t) must be established by calibration with
monodisperse polymer standards. A calibration curve is shown in Figure 5.10. Typically,
when the data are plotted in the form log M versus v, the curve is linear over much of the
range, but sometimes turns up sharply at low v (high M).

82

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

7

log10 M

6

5

Polystyrene
in THF
22 ºC
4

19 20 21

22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
GPC count no. (1 count = 5 cm3)

30 31

32

 w /M
 n ) < 1.1 polystyrene samples
FIGURE 5.10 GPC calibration curve. Narrow polydispersity (M
in tetrahydrofuran at 22  C.

Example 5.6 Discuss the physical significance of an upturn in the calibration curve at
low v.
Solution. The point at which the curve begins to shoot up is set by the largest pore size in the
column. All of the chains that are too large to fit in those pores will pass through the column
at the same rate, giving the infinite slope; that is, the packing material in a particular column
cannot discriminate between molecules above that size. If the polymer sample to be
analyzed contains significant material at high molecular weight, a column with larger pores
should either replace the original column or be added in series to extend the calibration and
obtain a good separation.

The calibration curve, strictly speaking, applies only to the particular polymer, solvent,
temperature, flow rate, and column for which it was established. Change any one, and the
calibration is no longer valid. Most SEC calibrations are obtained with polystyrene, because
the necessary monodisperse standards are readily available at reasonable cost. What do you
do when you want to analyze another polymer? If absolute values are not needed, the
molecular weights can be reported with respect to the polystryene (or other polymer)

GEL PERMEATION (OR SIZE-EXCLUSION) CHROMATOGRAPHY (GPC, SEC)

83

standards used to calibrate. A more sophisticated approach was suggested by Grubisic
et al. [8]. When they plotted log([h]M) (the product [h]M is proportional to the hydrodynamic volume of the molecules) versus v, they obtained a single, universal calibration curve
for a variety of different polymers. Thus, if you measure intrinsic viscosity along with SEC
elution volume for your polystyrene standards (or calculate [h] for them with Eq. 5.18 and
literature values for K and a), you can plot the universal calibration curve for your column.
To back out a calibration curve for a different polymer, you would need to know K and a
under the new conditions:
½h0 M0 ¼ ½hM ¼ KM ðaþ1Þ

ð5:35Þ



½h0 M0 1=ðaþ1Þ
M¼
K

ð5:36Þ

where the subscript 0 above refers to the calibration conditions, that is, values from the
universal calibration.
Balke et al. [9] have proposed a calibration method that requires only a single
 w . The method assumes that the relation between
 n and M
polydisperse sample of known M
log M and v is linear, and therefore it can be characterized by two parameters, a slope and an
 w can be calculated (using
 n and M
intercept. Given the GPC curve and the calibration, M
techniques outlined below). With the GPC data on the standard, a computer program
 w are obtained, in effect
 n and M
adjusts the two calibration parameters until the known M
using the two known average molecular weights to solve for the two unknown calibration
parameters. If the calibration curve is not linear (and you would have no way of knowing),
serious errors can result.
Most GPC packages include the software necessary to calculate molecular weight
averages and the complete distribution from the data and the calibration, so one needs only
to push the appropriate buttons. Nevertheless, the equations are outlined below to provide
an understanding of what the software is doing and what its limitations might be.
Molecular weight averages may be approximated directly from the GPC curve and
calibration by breaking the curve into arbitrary volume increments Dv. Usually, Dv is taken
as 5 cm3, but smaller Dv’s improve accuracy. The number of moles of polymer in a volume
increment Dv is ni:
ni ¼

ci Dv
Mi

ð5:37Þ

where ci ¼ polymer mass concentration in the ith volume increment
Mi ¼ molecular weight of polymer in the ith volume increment (assumed
essentially constant over small Dv)Because ci ¼ Qi/k (Eq. 5.34),
ni ¼

Qi Dv
kMi

ð5:38Þ

If the volume increment Dv is constant, inserting Equation 5.38 into Equations 5.3 and 5.4
gives
X
X
ni M i
Qi
i
i

X
X
¼
ð5:39Þ
Mn ¼
ni
ðQi =Mi Þ
i

i

84

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

X

X

Qi Mi
w ¼ X
¼ X
M
ni Mi
Qi
i

ni Mi2

i

i

ð5:40Þ

i

Note that the proportionality constant k between concentration and GPC readout cancels
out, and therefore need not be known. Qi is normally read from the GPC curve as the
distance above the baseline (in any convenient units) at a given v. The baseline presumably
represents the detector output with the pure solvent. Establishing a good baseline is not
always a trivial procedure, and the results can be quite sensitive to its location. Mi is read
from the calibration curve at the same v. For greater accuracy, if necessary, the integral
analogs of Equations 5.39 and 5.40 may be used, with the integrals evaluated numerically:
ð1
Q dv
 n ¼ ð1 0
ð5:41Þ
M
ðQ=MÞdv
0

ð1

QM dv
0

ð
Mw ¼ 1
Q dv

ð5:42Þ

0

In most cases, the averages as calculated above and the qualitative information about the
distribution provided by the GPC curve are all that are necessary. However, the technique is
capable of providing the true distributions, if desired. The necessary calculations are
outlined below:
c dv Q dv ðg=cm3 Þðcm3 Þ
¼
ð5:43Þ
Moles of polymer in volume increment dv ¼
M
k M ðg=g molÞ
Moles of polymer=unit of M ¼

c dv
Q dv
¼
M dM kM dM

ð5:44Þ

mc dv
Qm dv
n ¼ moles of polymer in a molecular weight interval m ¼
¼
M
dM
kM
dM




ð5:45Þ
mc
dv
Qm
dv
¼
¼
2:303 M 2 dlogM
2:303 kM 2 dlogM
Note:
dv
1
¼
dlogM slope of calibration
The preceding calculations assign all the moles of polymer in a range m of the continuous
GPC curve to a single spike (see Section 5.4) to calculate the correct height of the
distribution:
ð
ð1
c
1 1Q
dv ¼
dv
ð5:46Þ
N¼
k 0 M
0 M
n ðQm=2:303M 2 Þðdv=dlogMÞ
ð1
¼
N
ðQ=MÞdv
0

ð5:47Þ

SUMMARY

w ¼ Weight of polymer in a mol wt interval m ¼ nM




mc
dv
Qm
dv
¼
¼
2:303M dlogM
2:303kM dlogM
W ¼ Total sample wt ¼

ð1

c dv ¼

0

ð
1 1
Q dv
k 0

Area under GPC curve
¼
k
w ðQm=2:303MÞðdv=dlogMÞ
ð1
¼
W
Q dv

85

ð5:48Þ

ð5:49Þ

ð5:50Þ

0

Again, k cancels out in these equations. Once the distributions are known, the exact
averages may be calculated by the techniques in Section 5.4. For example, insertion of
Equation 5.47 into Equations 5.23 and 5.26 gives Equations 5.41 and 5.42.
GPC columns can be selected that have a wide spectrum of pore sizes (and thus separate
a wide range of molecular weights–from thousands to millions). Alternatively, columns
with more narrow pore size distributions can be used to get a better separation of polymers
that have similar molecular weights—say from 1000 to 20,000. These columns are
designed to be used with organic solvents (required for most polymers) or water that
flow through as the mobile phase. The selection of which columns to use depends on the
polymer structure and the expected molecular weight distribution.
A multiangle laser light-scattering photometer is often added to the usual concentration
detector. This combination performs an online light-scattering determination of the M of the
polymer in the eluting stream. This makes GPC an absolute technique, eliminating the need
for calibration. Similarly, a differential viscometer is commercially available which performs
an online intrinsic viscosity measurement on the column effluent [10]. Recall that the
ordinate of the universal calibration is [h]M. This device requires simple calibration (in effect
locating the universal calibration curve for the particular column, temperature, solvent, etc.)
to provide absolute molecular weight distributions and also provides information on the
hydrodynamic volume of the molecules in solution and therefore on branching, because a
branched molecule in solution has a smaller hydrodynamic volume than a linear molecule of
the same molecular weight. As mentioned earlier, an important caution regarding GPC/SEC
is as follows: because the molecules are separated based on their size, linear polymers will
flow differently through the stationary phase (the packed column) than branched or grafted
polymers, so molecular weight estimation by this technique is normally less accurate for
branched, grafted, or dendritic (very highly branched) polymers.
5.6

SUMMARY

Molecular weight has an enormous impact on polymer properties, as we will discover in later
chapters. Because polymers are made of many copies of the same repeat unit, traditional
methods to determine absolute molecular weights are not applicable. Thus, several techniques are discussed in this chapter to measure or estimate polymer molecular weights.
Depending on the techniques used, the number-average or weight-average molecular weights
are determined, with most sensitive techniques requiring that the polymer be in dilute

86

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

solution so that physically entangled polymers are not mistakenly recorded as one large
polymer. Of the techniques discussed so far, gel permeation chromatography offers the
greatest amount of information about a polymer sample, giving the size distribution of a
 w and the polydispersity index.
 n and M
polymer sample, which allows calculation of M
PROBLEMS
1

Given the following chain lengths (x’s) for poly(ethylene terephthalate), determine
the number average molecular weight, weight average molecular weight, and
polydispersity index. The system consists of 10 polymer chains, with repeat unit
lengths of 12, 25, 175, 186, 192, 194, 199, 200, 202, and 212.

2

The weights of the (extremely) offensive linemen of the MIT (Monongahela Institute
of Technology) football team are:
Cussler
Miller
Westerberg
Brenner
Anderson
Jain
Prieve

Split end
Left tackle
Left guard
Center
Right guard
Right tackle
Tight end

180 lb
270 lb
256 lb
285 lb
260 lb
305 lb
250 lb

Calculate the number- and weight-average line weights.
3

Using end group analysis to find molecular weight, 6.50 moles of ethanediamine
(H2NCH2CH2NH2) were reacted with 6.50 moles of adipic acid
(HOOCCH2CH2CH2CH2COOH). After the reaction, a titration was performed using NaOH (which reacts with COOH) and an indicating dye to determine
the number of acid groups remaining free after the polymerization. If 73.0 mL of
3.0 M NaOH were required to neutralize the polymer, what is the average molecular
weight (Mn) of the polymer?

4

An osmometry experiment was done to estimate the molecular weight of a sample of
polystyrene. The concentration of polymer in toluene was varied and the height
difference between the solution and the solvent was measured. The temperature was
27  C, where the specific gravity of toluene is 0.8667. Based on the following data,
 n?
 w or M
determine the molecular weight of PS. (A graph is required.) Is this M
Concentration, CA g/mL
0.0320
0.0660
0.100
0.140
0.190

Osmotic Pressure, pA, cm of Solvent
0.700
1.82
3.10
5.44
9.30

PROBLEMS

5

87

Six students have taken viscometry data for a monodisperse sample of atactic
polystyrene at six different concentrations in toluene. Unfortunately, the techniques
were not all identical, so they reported different versions of viscosity. The density of
toluene at 30  C is 0.8665 g/mL, 0.8656 g/mL at 40  C. The viscosity of toluene is
0.5260 cP at 30  C, 0.4710 cP at 40  C.
Given the data below, resolve the experiments so that you can determine the
 v , of the polymer.
viscosity-average molecular weight, M
Experiment 1: Polymer concentration in toluene C ¼ 0.1000 g/dL; inherent viscosity
¼ 0.060254 dL/g, 30  C.
Experiment 2: C ¼ 0.0500 g/dL; used an Ostwald viscometer at 30  C to determine a
flow time of 4 min, 36.50 s; in the viscometer calibration equation h/r ¼ at þ b/t,
a ¼ 0.001340, and b ¼ 65.760 (where time is in seconds, density in g/mL, and
viscosity in cP)
Experiment 3: C ¼ 0.1100 g/mL; solution viscosity ¼ 1.07360 cP at 40  C.
Experiment 4: C ¼ 0.1650 g/dL; determined the relative viscosity solution to be
1.0130 at 30  C.
Experiment 5: C ¼ 8.0 g/mL; determined specific viscosity was 10.896 at 30  C
Experiment 6: C ¼ 0.0290 g/dL; used a cone-and-plate viscometer at 30  C to find a
solution viscosity of 0.52655 cP
MHS constants for atactic polystyrene at 30  C are: K ¼ 0.2  103 mL/g; a ¼ 0.72.
 v.
Verify the validity of each experiment for estimating M
Note: Discount experiments if they were not properly conducted.

6

Consider a copolymer with repeating units A and B in which the mole fraction of A is
yA. The molecular weights of the repeating units are mA and mB. Obtain the analog of
Equation 5.5a for the copolymer, in which x represents the total number of repeating
units of both kinds.

7

A discrete distribution of chain lengths has the same number of moles of each species
over the range 1 x a and nothing outside of that range. Obtain expressions for xn,
xw , and the polydispersity index for this distribution. Hints: Start with Equations 5.3a
and 5.4a. You may have to look up some series sums in a math table.

8

Consider the continuous distribution of chain lengths in which the number of
moles of each species is constant over the range 0
x
a and zero outside
that range.
(a) Obtain expressions for xn, xw , and the polydispersity index.
(b) What is the constant value of (n/N) between 0 and a?
(c) Obtain an expression for the weight-fraction distribution (w/W) as a function of
x and sketch it.
(d) Show that your answers to Problem 5.7 above agree with these when a » 1.

9

Crud Chemicals is using GPC to analyze polystyrene samples plasticized with low
 n ¼ 400. Their calibration curve is
molecular weight mixed hydrocarbon oil, M
identical to the one in Figure 5.10 and from past experience they know that the
unplasticized polymer gives a GPC curve just like Figure 5.9c.

88

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

(a) Sketch what you think a GPC curve for a plasticized material would look like.
(b) If you know that koil ¼ 0.70 kPS (in Equation 5.34), could you use the GPC
curve to determine the weight fraction plasticizer in the sample? If so, clearly
describe how. If not, what additional information would you need?
10

Given the hypothetical distribution of chain lengths:
n
¼ Cð1  103 xÞ
N

0

x

103

(a) Determine the value of the constant C.
(b) Calculate xn , xw , and the polydispersity index for this distribution.
(c) Find the expression for the weight fraction of chains as a function of molecular
length x, w/W, and roughly sketch this distribution as w/W versus x. Sketch n/N
versus x on the same plot.
11

Some authorities prefer to represent molecular weight distributions in cumulative
(integral) form rather than the differential form used here. Cumulative distributions
are the number or weight fraction of material in the sample with chain length x (or
molecular weight M), so that the maximum value of the y-axis is 1.
For the distribution of chains in Example 5.5, obtain expressions for the cumulative
mole and weight distributions in terms of x/
xn and sketch them.

12

A polystyrene sample has the same distribution of chain lengths as given in Example 5.5.
A light-scattering measurement gives a molecular weight of 208,000. Using the result
from Example 5.5(c), calculate the mass of material with x ¼ 100 in a 100 g sample of
this polystyrene.

13

Many commercially used polymers are actually blends of two or more different
molecular weights, which gives a net composition with a bimodal molecular weight
distribution.
(a) If an equal weight of polymers A, B, and C (below) are blended, what are the
 w , and polydispersity of the blend?
 n, M
new M

Polymer A:
Polymer B:
Polymer C:

(b)

n
M

w
M

PDI

200,000
350,000
150,000

600,000
400,000
150,000

3.00
1.14
1.00

Draw (sketch) a graph to represent the results of running this blend through a
gel permeation chromatograph. The y-axis is an indicator of intensity (refractive index or absorbance) and is proportional to the mass of polymers that are
leaving the GPC column. Label the x- and y-axes and label the parts of the
chromatograph to show the different polymers in the blend (A, B, and C).
Consider that the A, B, and C peaks may overlap.

89

Refractive index
(arbitrary units)

REFERENCES

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Elution volume (mL)

FIGURE 5.11

14

Raw data from GPC Chromatogram of Polystyrene.

The people at Crud Chemicals eagerly await the first GPC analysis of the polystyrene
from their new polymerization process. There is a hushed silence as the first sample is
injected into the GPC column. Suddenly, the chart pen begins to move, and to
everyone’s amazement, the GPC curve in Figure 5.11 emerges:
Not knowing what to make of this, they call you in as a consultant. Their GPC operates
at 22  C with THF solvent. Its calibration curve is identical to Figure 5.10.
(a)

Sketch the number-fraction molecular weight distribution for their sample,
including quantitative molecular weight extremes.
 w for their sample. You can do this approximately using the
 n and M
(b) Calculate M
discrete equations but really impress them and do it exactly by treating the
continuous distribution.
15

Consider the polymer mixture formed in Example 5.2. Each component of the mixture
follows the distribution of chain lengths given in Example 5.5. For simplicity, the
molecular weight of a repeat unit may be taken as m ¼ 100. What are the mole
fractions of material with x ¼ 10 (n10/N) and (w10/W) in the mixture?

REFERENCES
[1] Martin, J.R., J.F. Johnson, and A.R. Cooper, J. Macromol. Sci. Rev. C8(1), 57 (1972).
[2] Nunes, R.W., J.R. Martin, and J.F. Johnson, Polym. Eng. Sci. 22(4), 193 (1982).
[3] Collins, E.A., et al., Experiments in Polymer Science, Wiley, New York, 1973.
[4] Burge, D.E., American Laboratory Raw data from GPC Chromatogram of Polystyrene 9(7), 41
(1977).
[5] Billmeyer, F., Textbook of Polymer Science, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1971, Chapter 3.
[6] Kurata, M. and Y. Tsunashima, Viscosity-molecular weight relationships and unperturbed
dimensions of linear chain molecules, Chapter VII/1 in Polymer Handbook, 3rd ed.,
J Brandrupand E.H. Immergut (eds), Wiley, New York, 1975.

90

CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT

[7] Provder, T. (ed.), Size Exclusion Chromatography: Methodology and Characterization of
Polymers and Related Materials, ACS Symposium Series No. 245, American Chemical
Society, Washington, DC, 1984.
[8] Grubisic, Z. et al., J. Polym. Sci. B-5, 753 (1967).
[9] Balke, S.T., et al., Ind. Eng. Chem., Prod. Res. Dev. 8, 54 (1969).
[10] Yau, W.W. and S.W. Rementer, J. Liquid Chromatogr. 13(4), 626; Wang, P.J. and B.S
Glassbrenner, ibid, 11(16) 3321 (1988).

CHAPTER 6

THERMAL TRANSITIONS IN POLYMERS

6.1

INTRODUCTION

The reader should be familiar with thermal transitions, particularly the melting (or
freezing) and the boiling points of pure substances. Polymers are a bit more complex;
their size leads to the definition of a new term, the glass transition temperature, which
divides glassy from rubbery behavior. The polydispersity of polymeric samples also leads
to melting point ranges. Alternately, the boiling point is largely unimportant for polymers,
since they degrade well before macromolecules vaporize. This chapter focuses on some of
the unique thermal behavior observed in polymers and explains why polymers have a
thermal history that is crucial in determining physical properties.
6.2

THE GLASS TRANSITION

It has long been known that amorphous polymers can exhibit two distinctly different types
of mechanical behavior. Some, such as poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), trademarked
as Lucite or Plexiglas , and polystyrene (PS), are hard, rigid, glassy plastics at room
temperature. Other polymers, for example, polybutadiene, poly(ethyl acrylate), and
polyisoprene, are soft, flexible rubbery materials. If, however, PS and PMMA are heated
to around 125  C, they exhibit typical rubbery properties; when a rubber ball is cooled in
liquid nitrogen, it becomes rigid and glassy and shatters when an attempt is made to bounce
it. So, there is some temperature, or narrow range of temperatures, below which an
amorphous polymer is in a glassy state and above which it is rubbery. This temperature is
known as the glass transition temperature, Tg. The glass transition temperature is a
property of the polymer, and whether the polymer has glassy or rubbery properties depends
on whether its application temperature is above or below its glass transition temperature.
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

91

92

THERMAL TRANSITIONS IN POLYMERS

Note that the Tg is a property of the amorphous regions of polymers; however, since no
polymer is 100% crystalline, the Tg is important for all polymeric materials.
6.3

MOLECULAR MOTIONS IN AN AMORPHOUS POLYMER

To understand the molecular basis for the glass transition, the various molecular motions
occurring in an amorphous polymer mass may be broken into four categories.
1. Translational motion of entire molecules that permits flow.
2. Cooperative wriggling and jumping of segments of molecules approximately 40–50
carbon atoms in length, permitting flexing and uncoiling, that lead to elasticity.
3. Motions of a few atoms along the main chain (five or six, or so) or of side groups on
the main chains.
4. Vibrations of atoms about equilibrium positions, as occurs in crystal lattices, except
that the atomic centers are not in a regular arrangement in an amorphous polymer.
Motions 1–4 above are arranged in order of decreasing activation energy (as well as
decreasing number of atoms involved in the motion), that is, smaller amounts of thermal
energy (kT1) are required to produce them. The glass transition temperature is thought to be
that temperature at which motions 1 and 2 are pretty much “frozen out,” and there is only
sufficient energy available for motions 3 and 4. Of course, not all molecules possess the
same energies at a given temperature. The molecular energies follow a Boltzmann
distribution, and even below Tg, there will be occasional type 2 and even type 1 motions,
which can manifest themselves over extremely long periods of time.
6.4

DETERMINATION OF Tg

How is the glass transition temperature studied? A common method is to observe the
variation of some thermodynamic property with T, for example, the specific volume, as
shown in Figure 6.1. As temperature rises, the polymer expands, with a change to a higher
slope in the v versus T plot above the glass transition temperature.
The value of Tg determined in this fashion will vary somewhat with the rate of cooling or
heating. This reflects the fact that long, entangled polymer chains cannot respond
instantaneously to changes in temperature and illustrates the difficulty in making thermodynamic measurements on polymers. It often takes an extremely long time to reach
equilibrium, if indeed it is ever reached, and it is difficult to be sure if and when it is
reached. Strictly speaking, the glass transition temperature should be defined in terms of
equilibrium properties or at least those measured with very low rates of temperature
changes. Also, a sharp “break” in the property is never observed, but Tg can always be
established within a couple of degrees by extrapolation of the linear regions (as shown in
Figure 6.1). Other properties such as refractive index may also be used to establish Tg.

kT is the product of the Boltzmann constant and absolute temperature. It is related to energy on a molecular level
and is discussed in more detail in physical chemistry.
1

DETERMINATION OF Tg

93

Specific volume, v (cm3/g)

0.850

0.845

0.840
TR

0.835

8

12

16

20

24

28

32

36

40

Temperature (ºC)

FIGURE 6.1 Specific volume (v) versus temperature for poly(vinyl acetate) [1].

In contrast to a change in slope at the glass transition, a thermodynamic property such as
specific volume exhibits a discontinuity with temperature at the crystalline melting point in
polymers as in other materials (Figure 6.2). The glass transition is therefore known as a
second-order thermodynamic transition (where v versus T is continuous and dv/dT versus T
is discontinuous) in contrast to a first-order transition such as the melting point (where v
versus T is discontinuous).
Tg characterizes the amorphous phase. Since all polymers have at least some amorphous
material (they cannot be 100% crystalline), they all have a Tg, but not all polymers have a
crystalline melting point, they cannot have if they do not crystallize (and many polymers
will degrade before they melt).
Transitions in polymers are rapidly and conveniently studied using differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) [3]. Small samples (10 mg) of the polymer and an inert reference
1.3000

Specific volume, v (cm3/g)

1.2500
1.2000
1.1500
1.1000
1.0500
1.0000
0.9500
–40 –20 0

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180

T (ºC)

FIGURE 6.2 Specific volume–temperature relations for linear polyethylene (Marlex-50). *:
Specimen slowly cooled from melt to room temperature prior to fusion. : Specimen crystallized
at 130  C for 40 days, then cooled to room temperature prior to fusion [2].

THERMAL TRANSITIONS IN POLYMERS

Exothermic

94

Endothermic

Heat flow rate

Crystallization

Melting
Tg

Tm
Temperature

FIGURE 6.3 Schematic DSC curve. This is what would be observed on heating a material from
state 2 (Example 6.8, Figure 6.5) to state 1.

substance (one that undergoes no transitions in the temperature range of interest) are
mounted in a block with a heater for each and thermocouples to monitor temperatures. The
thermodynamic property monitored here is the enthalpy. The power supplied to each heater
is monitored and adjusted to keep the sample and the reference at the same temperature as
both are heated at a programmed rate (typically 5–20  C/min). At Tg, the heat capacity of
the sample suddenly increases, requiring more power (relative to the reference) to maintain
the same temperatures. This differential heat flow to the sample (endothermic) causes a
drop in the DSC curve (Figure 6.3). At Tm, the sample crystals want to melt at constant
temperature, so a sudden input of large amounts of heat is required to keep the sample
temperature even with the reference temperature. This results in the characteristic
endothermic melting peak. Crystallization, in which large amounts of heat are given off
at constant temperature, gives rise to a similar but exothermic peak (although this peak is
missing for many polymers that either do not crystallize appreciably or are already
crystalline before heating). By measuring the net energy flow to or from the sample, heat
capacities and heats of fusion can be determined. Decomposition (endothermic) and
oxidation (exothermic) reactions can also be conveniently studied (as can exothermic
polymerization reactions, as discussed later).
In Figure 6.3, the crystallization and melting peaks are shown as occurring over a
temperature range, and the rates of heating (or cooling) can broaden (for higher dT/dt rates)
or narrow (for slow heating or cooling) these peaks. However, even with a very slow
temperature ramp, the melting transition will occur over a range of temperatures rather than
being well defined at a single temperature (e.g., compared with a pure low molecular
weight substance, say ice, polymer samples are polydisperse, having a range of crystallite
sizes and having entanglements and complex secondary interactions that cause broad
melting peaks).
A DSC is programmed to heat the sample at a constant rate. The higher the rate, the
quicker the measurement, a practically desirable result. Unfortunately, because polymer
chains cannot respond instantaneously to the changing temperature, the measurement is
further from equilibrium. The dependence of the measured Tg or Tm on heating rate is at
least partially responsible for the range of values observed in the literature. To approach the
true equilibrium values, very low heating rates should be used or, better yet, several heating

FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE Tg

95

rates should be used and the results extrapolate back to zero heating rate. Because of the
time and effort involved, this is rarely done. Newer DSC models have a temperature
modulation program that allows fine-tuning of these measurements to more accurately
measure Tg and Tm. Dynamic mechanical measurements (see Chapter 16) can also provide
useful information on thermal transitions.

6.5

FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE Tg [4]

In general, the glass transition temperature depends on five factors.
1. The free volume of the polymer vf, which is the volume of the polymer mass not
actually occupied by the molecules themselves (think of a kitchen sponge, but on a
molecular level), that is, vf ¼ v  vs, where v is the specific volume of the polymer
mass and vs is the volume of the solidly packed molecules. The higher vf, the more
room the molecules will have to move around, resulting in a lower Tg. It has been
estimated that for all polymers vf /v  0.025 at Tg.
Example 6.1 Glass transition temperatures have been observed to increase at pressures of
several thousand psi. Why?
Solution. High pressures compress polymers, reducing v. Since vs does not change
appreciably, vf is reduced.

2. The attractive forces between the molecules––the more strongly they are bound
together, the more thermal energy will be required to produce motion. The solubility
parameter d (defined explicitly in Chapter 7) is a measure of intermolecular forces,
thus Tg increases with d. Polyacrylonitrile, because of the frequent, strong polar
bonding between chains, has a Tg higher than its degradation temperature and
therefore, though linear, is not thermoplastic.

3. The internal mobility of the chains, that is, their freedom to rotate about bonds.
Figure 6.4 shows potential energy as a function of rotation angle about a bond in a
polymer chain. For a carbon–carbon bond, there are three other bonds to each carbon
(assuming the backbone does not have double bonds): two will be pendent groups
and the third will be the continuation of the polymer backbone. The minimum energy
configuration, arbitrarily chosen as f ¼ 0, is the position where the largest substituents (the rest of the chain) are far away from each other as possible. As the bond
is rotated, the substituent groups are brought into juxtaposition, and energy is
required to “push them over the hump.” The maximum energy is needed to get the
two chain substituents past one another, and this energy must be available if complete
rotation is to be obtained. Rotation is necessary for type 1 and type 2 motions.

96

THERMAL TRANSITIONS IN POLYMERS

FIGURE 6.4 Rotation about a bond in a polymer chain backbone, viewed along the bond. The
dotted substituents are on the rear carbon atom.
TABLE 6.1 Effect of Potential Energy on Tg for Selected Polymers [4]
Polymer

d

Tg ( C)

Eo (kcal/mol)

Polydimethyl siloxane
Polyethylene
Polytetrafluoroethylene

7.3
7.9
6.2

–120
–85(?)
>20

0
3.3
4.7

Table 6.1 shows how Tg increases with Eo, the potential energy, for a series of
polymers with approximately the same d. Note how the ether oxygen “swivels” in the
silicone chain permitting very free rotation.
Example 6.2 Poly(a-methyl styrene) has a higher Tg than PS. Why?

Solution. The methyl group introduces extra steric hindrance to rotation, giving a higher Eo.

4. The stiffness of the chains––chains that have difficulty coiling and folding will have
higher Tg values. This stiffness usually goes hand-in-hand with high Eo, therefore it is
difficult to separate the effects of 3 and 4.
Chains with parallel bonds in the backbone (ladder-type polymers), for example,
polyimides (Example 2.4R), and those with highly aromatic backbones, such as
aramids (see Chapter 4.8) have extremely stiff chains and, therefore, tend to have
high Tg values. This makes these polymers mechanically useful at elevated temperatures but also very difficult to process.

THE THERMODYNAMICS OF MELTING

97

5. The chain length––as do many mechanical properties of polymers, the glass
transition temperature varies according to the empirical relation:
Tg ¼ Tg1 

C
x

ð6:1Þ

where C is a constant for the particular polymer, and Tg1 is the asymptotic value of the
glass transition temperature for infinite chain length. This reflects the increased ease of
motion for shorter chains. The decrease in Tg with x is only noticeable at relatively low
chain lengths. For most commercial polymers, x is high enough so that Tg  Tg1.

Example 6.3 Measurements such as those described above show that the addition of a
small molecular weight chemical known as an external plasticizer (see Chapter 7) softens a
polymer by reducing its glass transition temperature. Explain.
Solution. The plasticizer molecules pry apart the polymer chains, in essence increasing the
free volume available to the chains (although not truly free, the small plasticizer molecules
interfere with chain motions much less than would other chains). Also, by forming
secondary bonds with the polymer chains themselves, type 1 and type 2 motions are easier.
6.6

THE EFFECT OF COPOLYMERIZATION ON Tg

The glass transition temperatures for random copolymers vary monotonically with
composition between those of the homopolymers. They can be approximated fairly well
from knowledge of the Tg values of the homopolymers, Tg1 and Tg2, with the empirical
relation:
1
w1 w2
¼
þ
Tg Tg1 Tg2

ð6:2Þ

where the w’s are weight fractions of the monomers in the copolymer. This relation forms
the basis for a method of estimating the Tg values of highly crystalline polymers, where the
properties of the small amount of amorphous material are masked by the majority of
crystalline material present. If a series of random copolymers can be produced in which the
randomness prevents crystallization over a certain composition range, then Equation 6.2
can be used to extrapolate to w1 ¼ 1 or w2 ¼ 1, giving the Tg values of the homopolymers.
This method is open to question because it assumes that the presence of major amounts of
crystallinity does not restrict the molecular response in the amorphous regions. In fact,
the Tg values of highly crystalline polymers (polyethylene, in particular) are still open
to debate.
6.7

THE THERMODYNAMICS OF MELTING

The crystalline melting point Tm in polymers is a phase change similar to that observed in
low molecular weight organic compounds, metals, and ceramics.

98

THERMAL TRANSITIONS IN POLYMERS

The Gibbs free energy of melting is given by
DGm ¼ DHm  TDSm

ð6:3Þ

At the equilibrium crystalline melting point, Tm, DG ¼ 0, therefore
Tm ¼

DHm
DSm

ð6:4Þ

Now DHm is the energy needed to overcome the crystalline bonding forces at
constant T and P, and is essentially independent of chain length of high polymers. For
a given mass or volume of polymer, however, the shorter the chains are, the more
randomized they become upon melting, giving a higher change in entropy on mixing,
DSm. (For a more detailed description of this in connection with solutions, see Chapter 7.)
Thus, the crystalline melting point decreases with decreasing chain length and in a
polydisperse polymer, the distribution of chain lengths give a distribution of melting points.
Equation 6.4 also indicates that chains that are strongly bound in the crystal lattice, that
is, have a high DHm, will have a high Tm, as expected. Also, the stiffer and less mobile
chains, those that can randomize less upon melting and therefore have low DSm, will tend to
have higher Tm values.
Example 6.4 Discuss how the crystalline melting point varies with n in the “nylon n”
series, where n can be varied.

Solution. Increasing values of n dilute the nylon linkages that are responsible for
interchain hydrogen bonding, and thus should lower DHm and the crystalline melting
point. As n goes to infinity, the structure approaches that of linear polyethylene. This
should represent the asymptotic minimum Tm, with the chains held together only by van
der Waal’s forces.
Table 6.2 illustrates the variation in Tm and some other properties with n for some
commercial members of the nylon series.

TABLE 6.2 Variation of Properties with n for Nylon n’s
n
6
11
12
1 (PE)

Tm ( C)

r (g/cm3)

Tensile Strength (psi)

Water Absorption % in 24 h

216
185
177
135

1.14
1.04
1.02
0.97

12,000
8000
7500
5500

1.7
0.3
0.25
nil

THE THERMODYNAMICS OF MELTING

99

Example 6.5 Consider the following classes of linear, aliphatic polymers:

For given values of n and x, the crystalline melting points increase from left to right, as
indicated. Explain.
Solution. The polyurethane chains contain the O swivel, thus they are the most flexible,
having the largest DSm, and having the lowest Tm. Hydrogen bonding, and thus DHm, is
roughly comparable in the polyurethanes and polyamides. The polyureas and polyamides
should have chains of comparable flexibility (no swivel), but with the extra NH, the
polyureas form stronger or more extensive hydrogen bonds, and therefore have a higher
DHm than the polyamides.

Example 6.6 Experiments show that uniaxial orientation (drawing) increases the crystalline melting point. Explain.
Solution. The entropy of melting, DSm, is the difference between the entropies of the
amorphous and the crystalline materials:
DSm ¼ Sa  Sc
drawing align the amorphous chains in the direction of stretch, increasing order,
reducing Sa and, thus, DSm. According to Equation 6.4, this increases Tm.

Example 6.7 Liquid-crystalline polyesters (Section 4.8) have significantly higher Tm
values than non-LC polyesters. For example, Xydar has a Tm value in the vicinity of 400  C,
whereas poly(ethylene terephthalate), shown in Example 2.4D, has a Tm of 267  C and poly
(butylene terephthalate), shown in Example 2.4C, has a Tm of 224  C. Explain.
Solution. Here, one might expect the ordinary polyesters to have higher DHm’s, particularly
the PET, because of the decreased spacing between the polar ester linkages, so the
explanation must lie in the DSm’s. Because thermotropic LCPs by definition maintain
considerable order in the molten state, they randomize less upon melting and therefore have
lower Sm’s than non-LC polyesters.

The crystalline melting point also increases a bit with the degree of crystallinity of a
polymer. For example, low-density polyethylene (approximately 50% crystalline) has a Tm
of about 115  C, whereas high-density polyethylene (approximately 80% crystalline) melts
at about 135  C. This can be explained by treating the amorphous material as an impurity. It
is well known that introducting an impurity lowers the melting point of common materials.

100

THERMAL TRANSITIONS IN POLYMERS

In a similar fashion, greater amounts of noncrystalline “impurities” lower the crystalline
melting point of a polymer.
6.8

THE METASTABLE AMORPHOUS STATE

Since polymer chains are largely immobilized below Tg, if they are cooled rapidly through
Tm to below Tg, it is sometimes possible to obtain a metastable amorphous state in polymers
that would be crystalline at equilibrium. This rapid cooling effectively locks the chains in a
random, amorphous state. As long as the material is held below Tg, this metastable
amorphous state persists indefinitely. When annealed above Tg (and below Tm), the
polymer crystallizes, as the chains gain the mobility necessary to pack into a lattice.
This behavior leads to classifying polymers as materials that have a thermal history,
indicating that the rate of cooling affects crystallinity (and other properties).
Poly(ethylene terephthalate), from Example 2.4D, because of its bulky chain structure,
crystallizes sluggishly and is therefore relatively easy to obtain in the metastable
amorphous state. When desired, crystallinity can be promoted by slow cooling from the
molten state, annealing between Tg and Tm, or by the addition of nucleating agents. PET has
important commercial applications both in the metastable amorphous state (soda bottles)
and in the crystalline state (textile fibers, microwaveable food trays, molding resin). On the
other hand, no one has yet succeeded in producing an amorphous polyethylene, with its
much more flexible chains, although the degree of crystallinity can be reduced substantially
by rapid cooling (Figure 6.2). Interestingly, metallurgists can also produce amorphous
metals by rapidly cooling certain alloys.
Example 6.8 Poly(ethylene terephthalate), or PET (Mylar, Dacron), is cooled rapidly from
300  C (state 1) to room temperature. The resulting material is rigid and perfectly
transparent (state 2). The sample is then heated to 100  C (state 3) and maintained at
that temperature, during which time it gradually becomes translucent (state 4). It is then
cooled down to room temperature and is again found to be rigid, but is now translucent
rather than transparent (state 5). For this sample of PET, Tmf ¼ 267  C and Tgf ¼ 69  C.
Sketch a general specific-volume versus temperature curve for a crystallizable polymer,
illustrating Tg and Tm, and show the locations of states 1–5 for this PET sample.
Solution. Figure 6.5 illustrates the general v versus T curve for a crystallizable polymer. The
dotted upper portion represents the metastable amorphous material obtainable by rapid
cooling. The history of the PET sample is shown in the diagram. The metastable amorphous
material (transparent, state 2) is obtained by rapid cooling to below Tg; however, when
heated to state 3 (between the Tg and Tm), the sample undergoes the process of annealing,
becoming more crystalline. The schematic DSC curve in Figure 6.3 illustrates what would
be observed in a DSC measurement starting with a material in the metastable amorphous
state (state 2) and heating it to above Tm (state 1).
Note the change in slope at the glass transition temperature. Also, as long as state 3 is
above Tg, the chains will have enough mobility to rearrange (eventually) into a more stable
semicrystalline state. Thus (comparing states 2 and 5), this information is not enough to
simply state the molecular weight of PET and temperature to determine the properties; the
thermal history influences crystallinity that can have a profound effect on the properties of
the material (from density to optical properties and mechanical behavior). Thus, this is a

THE INFLUENCE OF COPOLYMERIZATION ON THERMAL PROPERTIES

101

1

3
2

v (cc/g)

4
5

Tm
Tg

Temperature

FIGURE 6.5 Specific volume–temperature relation for crystallizable polymers. Numbers apply to
Example 6.8.

great example of why polymers have a thermal history. State 5 could also have been
reached by slowly cooling the PET sample from state 1.
Polymer blends, which are mixtures of two or more different homopolymers, are also
commonly used in commercial materials. Except in the rare case where interpolymer
crystallites can form, blends exhibit multiple Tg’s and Tm’s, one for each component of
the blend.
6.9 THE INFLUENCE OF COPOLYMERIZATION ON THERMAL
PROPERTIES
Compared with polymer blends, copolymers have only one Tg and one Tm. The influence of
random copolymerization on Tm and Tg is interesting and technologically important.
Occasionally, if two repeating units are similar enough sterically to fit into the same crystal
lattice, random copolymerization will result in copolymers whose crystalline melting
points vary linearly with composition between those of the pure homopolymers. Much
more common, however, is the case where the homopolymers form different crystal lattices
because of steric differences. The random incorporation of minor amounts of repeating unit
B with A will disrupt the A lattice, lowering Tm beneath that of homopolymer A, and vice
versa. In an intermediate composition range, the disruption will be so great that no
crystallites can form and the copolymers will be completely amorphous. A phase diagram
for such a random copolymer system is shown in Figure 6.6.
The physical properties of random copolymers are determined from their composition
and the temperature, as can be found in a diagram such as the one qualitatively shown in
Figure 6.6. In region 1, the polymer is a homogeneous, amorphous, and, if pure, transparent
material. The distinction between melt and rubbery behavior is not sharp; at higher
temperatures, the material flows more easily and becomes less elastic in character
(assuming that the polymer does not reach degradation temperatures). It should be kept
in mind, though, that the viscosities of polymer melts, even well above Tg or Tm, are far
greater than those encountered in nonpolymeric materials.

102

THERMAL TRANSITIONS IN POLYMERS

FIGURE 6.6

Phase diagram for a random copolymer system.

A copolymer in region 5 is a typical amorphous, glassy polymer: hard, rigid, and usually
brittle. Again, if the polymer is pure, it will be perfectly transparent. PMMA (Lucite,
Plexiglas) and PS are familiar examples of homopolymers with these properties.
Copolymers in regions 2 and 3 consist of rigid crystallites dispersed in a relatively soft,
rubbery, amorphous matrix. Since the refractive indices of the crystalline and amorphous
phases are in general different, materials in these regions will be translucent to opaque,
depending on the size of the crystallites, the degree of crystallinity, and the thickness of
the sample. Since the crystallites restrict chain mobility, the materials are not elastic, but
the rubbery matrix confers flexibility and toughness. The stiffness depends largely on the
degree of crystallinity; the more rigid crystalline phase present, the stiffer the polymer.
Polyethylene (e.g., flexible squeeze bottles or rigid bleach bottles) is a good example of a
homopolymer with these properties, typical of a polymer that is between its Tg and Tm at
room temperature.
Copolymers in regions 4 and 6 consist of crystallites in an amorphous, glassy matrix.
Since both phases are rigid, the materials are hard, stiff, and rigid. Again, the two phases
impart opacity. Nylon 6/6 and nylon 6 are examples of homopolymers in a region below
both Tg and Tm at room temperature.
6.10

EFFECT OF ADDITIVES ON THERMAL PROPERTIES

A number of different compounds are used as polymer additives to tailor the properties of
materials for their end-use. As discussed in detail in Chapter 18, these additives include
dyes, fillers, plasticizers, and a variety of other compounds. Because each of these additives
gets between polymer chains (at least to some extent), they reduce the number of polymer–
polymer interactions and cause an increase in chain mobility (when compared to the pure
polymer at the same temperature). This causes a drop in Tg (which is exactly what a
plasticizer is designed to do, Figure 6.7). This decrease in Tg depends on the thermodynamic compatibility of the additive with the polymer. For some fillers, this may be quite
low, causing little change in Tg, but for chemical additives that interact with the polymer, Tg
can be reduced significantly. The thermodynamics of polymer solutions and polymer

THERMAL DEGRADATION OF POLYMERS

103

FIGURE 6.7 Effect of adding dioctyl phthalate (DOP) (a plasticizer), squares, or imidazolium ionic
liquid additives (bmimPF6 or hmimPF6), circles, to PMMA on Tg [5]. Reproduced by permission of
the Royal Society of Chemistry.

additives are discussed in detail in the next chapter. The melting point of a polymer with an
additive will not be influenced greatly, but the degree of crystallinity (and crystal sizes) will
drop markedly, as the additive will interfere in the formation of regular crystals.
6.11

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ABOUT Tg AND Tm

Some other useful observations regarding Tg and Tm are that for polymers with a
symmetrical repeating unit, such as polyethylene (CH2CH2) and poly(vinylidene
chloride), or Saran , (CH2CCl2), Tg/Tm  1/2 (for absolute T’s); for unsymmetrical
repeating units, such as polypropylene (CH2CHCH3) and polychlorotrifluoroethylene (CF2CFCl), Tg/Tm  2/3. These are just rough estimates, but in all cases Tg < Tm.
6.12

EFFECTS OF CROSSLINKING

To this point, the discussion has centered on non-crosslinked (and generally linear, rather
than branched) polymers. Light crosslinking, as in rubber bands, will not alter things
appreciably. However, higher degrees of crosslinking, if formed in the amorphous molten
state or in the solution, as is usually the case, will hinder the alignment of chains necessary
to form a crystal lattice and will thus reduce or prevent crystallization. Similarly, crosslinking restricts chain mobility and causes an increase in the apparent Tg. When the
crosslinks are more frequent than every 40–50 main chain atoms, the type 2 motions
necessary to reach the rubbery state can never be achieved and the polymer will degrade
before reaching Tg.
6.13

THERMAL DEGRADATION OF POLYMERS

As mentioned earlier in this chapter, several polymers start to degrade before reaching a
melting point. All polymers eventually degrade given enough heating. The degradation
process is sort of a depolymerization, except the bonds break randomly along the backbone,
 n and M
 w (and higher PI). The reductions in the molecular weight
resulting in a smaller M
also degrade the mechanical properties of the polymers. In many applications, additives are

104

THERMAL TRANSITIONS IN POLYMERS

used to stabilize polymers that may be used at high temperatures. However, anyone who
has microwaved a plastic bowl to the point of deformation understands that polymers can
degrade appreciably even at moderate temperatures, especially when compared to glass or
metal materials.
PVC is an example of a polymer that self-catalyzes its thermal degradation. Beginning
at temperature around 160  C, HCl is formed as a byproduct of thermal degradation, and,
even worse, the acid catalyzes further degradation of PVC. This is why PVC is not used for
high-temperature applications, and even for moderate temperatures, a thermal stabilizer is
normally added.
Thermal degradation is one of the primary challenges in effective polymer recycling.
Although thermoplastics can be melted and reused, uneven temperature distributions (or
the heat evolved while grinding polymers) can cause some degree of thermal degradation,
 w . This is partly why recycled polymers are most often used in
 n and M
reducing M
applications where high mechanical strength is less important, such as park benches and
grocery bags.
6.14

OTHER THERMAL TRANSITIONS

Thermal transitions other than Tg and Tm are sometimes observed in polymers. Some
polymers possess more than one crystal form, so there will be an equilibrium temperature
of transition from one to another. Similarly, second-order transitions below Tg occur in
some materials (Tg is then termed the a transition, the next lower is the b transition, and so
forth). These are attributed to motions of groups of atoms smaller than those necessary to
produce Tg (type 3 motions, Section 6.2). These transitions may strongly influence
properties. For example, tough amorphous plastics (e.g., polycarbonate) have such a
transition well below room temperature, while brittle amorphous plastics (e.g., PS and
PMMA) do not.
The existence of another transition above Tg has been claimed, but is still the subject of
considerable controversy. This Tll (liquid–liquid transition) presumably represents the
boundary between type 1 and type 2 motions. It has been observed in a number of
systems [6–8], and it has been suggested that Tll  1.2 Tg (in absolute temperature) for all
polymers [6]. For each article that reports Tll, however, it seems that there is another that
claims that Tll results from impurities (traces of solvent or unreacted monomer) in the
sample or is an artifact of the experimental or data-analysis technique [9,10].
PROBLEMS
1

Pure nylon 6/6 (see Example 2.4E for the structure) is a white, opaque plastic at room
temperature. If isophthalic acid (HOOCCOOH, with the acids in the meta
positions, on the first and third carbons) is substituted for adipic acid in the
polymerization, a rigid, transparent plastic is obtained. By varying the ratio of the
two acids, one can get a series of polyamide copolymers. Sketch a phase diagram like
Figure 6.6 for these copolymers. Be sure to show which repeating unit goes with each
composition extreme and also show the room temperature.

2

Three DSC runs are made on a semicrystalline polymer sample starting at room
temperature and passing through the glass-transition temperature and melting point.

PROBLEMS

105

Three different heating rates are used: 1, 5, and 20  C/min. Sketch qualitatively the
expected DSC thermograms to show how you think the observed Tg and Tm will vary
with heating rate.
3

Injection molding consists of squirting a molten polymer into a cold metal mold.
When thick parts are molded from a crystallizable polymer (e.g., polypropylene), they
sometimes exhibit “sink marks,” where the surface of the part has actually sunk away
from the mold wall.
(a) Explain why. Hint: Polymers have very low thermal diffusivity.
(b) How would an amorphous (non-crystallizable) polymer perform in injection
molding?

4

Two diols, ethylene glycol (Example 2.4D) and bisphenol-A (Example 2.4N), are
commercially available at low cost. Which would you choose for polyesterification
with a diacid if your objective was to:
(a) produce a transparent polyester and
(b) obtain the higher Tg.

5

A patent claims that a new polymer forms strong, highly crystalline parts when
injection molded. Furthermore, it is claimed that Tg > Tm for this material. Comment.

6

An amorphous emulsion copolymer consisting of 60 wt% methyl methacrylate
(homopolymer Tg ¼ 105  C) and 40 wt% ethyl acrylate (homopolymer Tg ¼ 23  C)
has been proposed as the basis of a latex paint formulation. A latex consists of tiny
(110 mm) polymer particles suspended in water. After application of the paint,
these particles must coalesce to form a film upon evaporation of water.
(a) Would the copolymer be suitable for an outdoor paint?
(b) An actual paint formulation based on this copolymer contains some mediumvolatility solvent dissolved in the latex particles. This solvent is designed to evaporate
over a period of a few hours after application of the paint. What is it doing there?

7

High molecular weight linear polyesters from 1,4-butanediol (HO(CH2)4OH) and
terephthalic acid (HOOCCOOH), with the acids in the para or opposite
positions) are successful engineering plastics (materials with high mechanical
strength and good thermal stability). They are, however, not used as a blister (sturdy,
see-through) packaging material. A polymer for the blister-packaging market is made
from the two monomers above plus isophthalic acid (meta(COOH)2). Explain
the difference in the applications.

8

Polyethylene (Tm ¼ 135  C, Tg < Troom) may be lightly crosslinked by a chemical
reaction with an organic peroxide at 175  C. Heat-shrink tubing is made from such
a crosslinked polyethylene. When heated at room temperature to about 150  C,
its diameter shrinks by a factor of three or four. Explain the thermal history
required to make and use this material and the driving force for shrinkage when
heat is applied.

9

A diagram like Figure 6.1 is prepared by heating a polymer well above its Tg and then
rapidly cooling it to the desired temperature and holding it there until v is measured.
Sketch v versus T curves for v measurements taken 1 min after cooling and 100 h after
cooling. Illustrate how this would affect the value of Tg obtained.

106

THERMAL TRANSITIONS IN POLYMERS

10

Professor Irving Inept of MIT (Monongahela Institute of Technology) figures that he
can pad his publication list by publishing a series of polymer tables. Similar to the
steam tables from thermodynamics or the CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics,
they will contain the thermodynamic properties of various polymers as functions of
temperature and pressure. Discuss the difficulties associated with
(a) obtaining the necessary data and
(b) applying the published numbers in practice.

11

Sketch on a copy of Figure 6.5 the path of a DSC test on a materials starting in states 2
and 5 and heated to above Tm.

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

Meares, P., Trans. Faraday Soc. 53, 31 (1957).
Mandelkern, L., Rubber Chem. Technol. 32, 1392 (1959).
Wunderlich, B., Thermal Analysis, Academic, San Diego, CA, 1990.
Tobolsky, A.B., Properties and Structure of Polymers, Wiley, New York, 1960, Chapter 2.
Scott, M.P., M. Rahman, and C.S. Brazel, Eur. Polym. J. 39, 1947 (2003).
Kumar, P.L., et al., Org. Coat. Plast. Chem. 44, 396 (1981).
Ibar, J.P., Polym. Prepr. 22(2), 405 (1981).
Boyer, R.F., Macromolecules 15(6), 1498 (1982).
Plazek, D.J., et al., J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys. Ed. 20(9), 1533, 1551 1565, 1575 (1982).
Loomis, L.D. and P. Zollar, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys. Ed. 21(2), 241 (1983).

CHAPTER 7

POLYMER SOLUBILITY AND SOLUTIONS

7.1

INTRODUCTION

Most people associate polymers with solid materials—from rubber bands to car tires to
Tupperware — but what about acrylic and latex paints or ketchup and salad dressing or
oil-drilling fluids? The thermodynamics and statistics of polymer solutions is an
interesting and important branch of physical chemistry, and is the subject of many good
books and large sections of books in itself. It is far beyond the scope of this chapter to
attempt to cover the subject in detail. Instead, we will concentrate on topics of practical
interest and try to indicate, at least qualitatively, their fundamental bases. Three factors
are of general interest:
1. What solvents will dissolve what polymers?
2. How do the interactions between polymer and solvent influence the properties of the
solution?
3. To what applications do the interesting properties of polymer solutions lead?

7.2

GENERAL RULES FOR POLYMER SOLUBILITY

Let us begin by listing some general qualitative observations on the dissolution of the
polymers:
1. Like dissolves like, that is, polar solvents will tend to dissolve polar polymers and
nonpolar solvents will tend to dissolve nonpolar polymers. Chemical similarity between
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

107

108

POLYMER SOLUBILITY AND SOLUTIONS

the polymer and the solvent is a fair indication of solubility; for example, poly(vinyl
alcohol) or PVA, (CH2CHOH)n-, will dissolve in water, HOH, and polystyrene
or PS, (CH2CH)n-, will dissolve in toluene, CH3, but toluene will not dissolve
PVA and water will not dissolve PS (which is really good news for those who drink
coffee out of foamed PS cups). Most polymers will also dissolve in their monomer.
2. In a given solvent at a particular temperature, the solubility of a polymer will
decrease with increasing molecular weight.
3. (a) Crosslinking eliminates solubility (swelling is the best the polymer can do);
only linear or branched polymers can be dissolved.
(b) Crystallinity, in general, acts like crosslinking, but it is possible in some cases
to find solvents strong enough to overcome the crystalline bonding forces and
dissolve the polymer. Heating the polymer toward its crystalline melting point
also leads to solubility in appropriate solvents. For example, nothing dissolves
polyethylene at room temperature. At 100  C, however, it will dissolve in a
variety of aliphatic, aromatic, and chlorinated hydrocarbons.
4. The rate of polymer dissolution in a solvent decreases with increasing molecular
weight. For reasonably high molecular weight polymers, it can be orders of
magnitude slower than for nonpolymeric solutes (and could take days for highly
entangled polymer chains to eventually dissolve).
It is important to note here that items 1, 2, and 3 are equilibrium phenomena and can be
described thermodynamically (at least in principle), while item 4 is a rate (or kinetic)
phenomenon and is governed by the rates of disentanglement and diffusion of polymer
chains in the solvent.
Example 7.1 The polymers of v-amino acids are termed “nylon n,” where n is the number of
consecutive carbon atoms in the chain. These polymers are made from a single monomer, as
these amino acids have two reactive functional groups. The general formula is
H O
–[ N–C –( CH2 )–n – 1 ]–x

The polymers are semicrystalline and will not dissolve in either water or hexane at room
temperature. They will, however, reach an equilibrium level of absorption when immersed
in each liquid. Describe how and why water and hexane absorption will vary with n.
Solution. Water is a highly polar liquid; hexane is nonpolar. The polarity of the nylons
depends on the relative proportion of polar nylon linkages in the chains. As n increases, the
polarity of the chains decrease (they become more hydrocarbon-like), so hexane absorption
increases with n and water absorption decreases.
H O
(–N–C )–

Example 7.2 Dry-cleaning companies use starch (a natural polymer) to remove wrinkles
and impart stiffness to clothes (similar to ironing at home). The dry-cleaning process adds
starch in a solution of perchloroethylene (C2Cl4), which is a good solvent for starch to the
clothes during cleaning and before pressing with a hot iron.

TYPICAL PHASE BEHAVIOR IN POLYMER–SOLVENT SYSTEMS

109

(a)

Explain how starch works in this process, based on the thermal and solution
properties of polymers. Discuss the effects of a solvent and heat on the glass
transition temperature.
(b) Because starch can be hydrolyzed in humid environments, and is not particularly
mechanically tough, wrinkles begin to reappear in clothes as they are worn. A
scientist at Crud Chemicals has come up with a new idea that will prevent clothes
from rewrinkling. The new idea will replace the aqueous starch used in ironing
with an aqueous solution of PS, which does not degrade and has a higher glass
transition temperature. Why will the new idea not work?
Solution. (a) Starch is a polymer based on a hexose repeat unit (glucose, specifically)
with the chemical formula: C6H12O6.
Starch is made into a solution with perchloroethylene when it is sprayed onto
clothing. At this point, it is above its Tg, which is lowered considerably by being in
a good solvent. This means that the starch is flexible and can be worked into the
clothing fibers. When heat is applied by an iron, the solvent evaporates, causing
the Tg to rise. By pressing the iron over the surface, the starch aligns with the
direction of motion, and since the Tg is now higher than room temperature, it
becomes rigid and glassy, fixing the clothes without wrinkles.
(b) It is not a bad idea; many clothing companies stitch more rigid fibers into
their “wrinkle-free” clothing lines, but the idea of ironing using a dispersion
of PS in water has one serious flaw: PS is insoluble in water. PS will form
globules or hard spheres in water (and the Tg will be unchanged since the
water is not a solvent and cannot decrease Tg as it does with starch) and when
ironed into a fabric, the microspheres of styrene will simply be pressed into
spots on the fabric, but it would be ineffective at pressing the shirt to remove
wrinkles.

7.3

TYPICAL PHASE BEHAVIOR IN POLYMER–SOLVENT SYSTEMS

Figure 7.1 shows schematically a phase diagram for a typical polymer–solvent system,
plotting temperature versus the polymer fraction in the system (essentially a T-x diagram
from thermodynamics). At low temperatures, the typical polymer does not dissolve well
in many solvents (although the dissolution process can take time, since polymer chains
must be disentangled to form a uniform solution). The diagram shows a two-phase
system at low temperatures but a completely miscible system at higher temperatures. In
the lower temperature phase envelope, the dotted tie lines connect the compositions of
phases in equilibrium: a solvent-rich phase (dilute solution) on the left and a polymerrich (swollen polymer or gel) phase on the right. As the temperature is raised,
interactions between the solvent and the polymer increase, and the compositions of
the phases come closer together, until at the upper critical solution temperature (UCST)
they are identical. Above the UCST, the system forms homogeneous (single-phase)
solutions across the entire composition range. The location of the phase boundary
depends on the interaction between the polymer and the solvent as well as the molecular
weight of the polymer.

110

POLYMER SOLUBILITY AND SOLUTIONS

Phase-separated region
a

b

LCST

Homogeneous
T

solutions

UCST

a

Phase-separated region

0

b
1

Fraction polymer

FIGURE 7.1 Schematic phase diagram for polymer–solvent system: (a) dilute solution phase;
(b) swollen polymer or “gel” phase.

In recent years, a number of systems have been examined that also exhibit a lower
critical solution temperature (LCST), as shown at the top of Figure 7.1. Here, a more
unusual thermodynamic property is exhibited when the polymer phase separates from
the solvent after being heated. (One might question the nomenclature the puts the LCST
above the UCST, but that is the accepted definition.) LCSTs are more difficult to observe
experimentally because they often lie well above the normal boiling points of the solvents.
When we talk about a polymer being soluble in a particular solvent, we generally mean
that the system lies between its LCST and UCST, that is, it forms a homogeneous solution
over the entire composition range. Keep in mind, however, that homogeneous solutions can
still be formed toward the extremes of the composition range below the UCST and above
the LCST.
7.4

THE THERMODYNAMIC BASIS OF POLYMER SOLUBILITY

“To dissolve or not to dissolve. That is the question.” (with apologies to W.S.). The answer
is determined by the sign of the Gibbs free energy. Consider the process of mixing pure
polymer and pure solvent (state 1) at constant pressure and temperature to form a solution
(state 2):
DG ¼ H  TDS
where
DG ¼ the change in Gibbs free energy upon mixing
DH ¼ the change in enthalpy due to mixing
T ¼ absolute temperature
DS ¼ the change in entropy due to mixing

ð7:1Þ

THE THERMODYNAMIC BASIS OF POLYMER SOLUBILITY

111

If only DG is negative, will the solution process be thermodynamically feasible. The
absolute temperature must be positive by definition and the change in entropy for a
solution process is generally positive (the chains become more disordered when
dissolved in solution). One possible exception is for lyotropic liquid-crystal materials,
where the chains organize into crystals when in solution. The positive product (TDS) is
preceded by a negative sign. Thus, the third term (TDS) in Equation 7.1 favors
solubility. The change in enthalpy (DH) may be either positive or negative. A positive
DH means that the solvent and polymer “prefer their own company,” that is, the pure
materials are in a lower energy state than the mixed solution, while a negative DH
indicates that the solution is in the lower energy state. If the latter situation is true, a
solution is assured. Negative DH’s usually arise where specific interactions such as
hydrogen bonds are formed between the solvent and polymer molecules. But, if DH is
positive, then DH < TDS must be true for the polymer to be soluble (and linking this to
the discussion of UCSTs, raising the temperature would be one way to achieve
solubility).
One thing that makes polymers unusual is that the entropy change in forming a polymer
solution is generally much smaller than that which occurs on dissolution of equivalent
masses or volumes of low molecular weight solutes. The reasons for this are illustrated
qualitatively on a two-dimensional lattice model in Figure 7.2. With the low molecular
weight solute (say, styrene monomer, CH2¼CH), the solute molecules may be distributed
randomly throughout the lattice, the only restriction being that a lattice slot cannot be
occupied simultaneously by two (or more) molecules. This gives rise to a large number of
configurational possibilities, that is, high entropy. In a polymer solution, however, each
chain segment is confined to a lattice site adjacent to the next chain segment, greatly
reducing the configurational possibilities. This also gives a reasonable illustration of the
challenge of dissolving polymers, as the chains must disentangle from a solid coil or blob to
float freely in a good solvent. Returning to the lattice, note that for a given number of chain
segments (equivalent masses or volumes of polymer), the more chains they are split up into,
that is, the lower their molecular weight, the higher the entropy upon dissolution. This
directly explains observation 2 in Section 7.2, the decrease in solubility with molecular
weight. But in general, for high molecular weight polymers, because the TDS term is so
small, if DH is positive then it must be even smaller if the polymer is to be soluble. So in the
absence of specific interactions, predicting polymer solubility largely boils down to
minimizing DH.

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 7.2 Lattice model of solubility: (a) low molecular weight solute; (b) polymeric solute.
* ¼ Solvent; ¼ Solute.

112

POLYMER SOLUBILITY AND SOLUTIONS

7.5

THE SOLUBILITY PARAMETER

How can DH be estimated? Well, for the formation of regular solutions (those in which the
solute and the solvent do not form specific interactions), the change in internal energy per
unit volume of solution is given by
DH  DE ¼ 1 2 ðd1  d2 Þ2 ½¼cal=cm3 soln

ð7:2Þ

where
DE ¼ the change in internal energy per unit volume of solution
i ¼ component volume fractions
di ¼ solubility parameters
The subscripts 1 and 2 usually (but not always) refer to solvent and solute (polymer),
respectively. The solubility parameter is defined as follows:
d ¼ ðCEDÞ1=2 ¼ ðDEv =vÞ1=2

ð7:3Þ

where
CED ¼ cohesive energy density, a measure of the intermolecular forces holding the
molecules together in the liquid state
DEv ¼ molar change in internal energy on vaporization
v ¼ molar volume of liquid (cm3/mol)
Traditionally, solubility parameters have been given in (cal/cm3)1/2 ¼ hildebrands (in honor
of the originator of regular solution theory), but they are now more commonly listed in
(MPa)1/2, where 1 hildebrand ¼ 0.4889 (MPa)1/2.
Now, for a process that occurs at constant volume and constant pressure, the changes in
internal energy and enthalpy are equal. Since the change in volume on solution is usually
quite small, this is a good approximation for the dissolution of polymers under most
conditions, so Equation 7.2 provides a means of estimating enthalpies of solution if the
solubility parameters of the polymer and the solvent are known.
Note that regardless of the magnitudes of d1 and d2 (they must be positive), the predicted
DH is always positive, because Equation 7.2 applies only in the absence of the specific
interactions that lead to negative DH’s. Inspection of Equation 7.2 also reveals that DH is
minimized and the tendency toward solubility is therefore maximized by matching the
solubility parameters as closely as possible. As a very rough rule-of-thumb (or heuristic
principle, if you prefer),
jd1  d2 j < 1 ðcal=cm3 Þ1=2

for solubility

ð7:4Þ

Measuring the solubility parameter of a low molecular weight solvent is not a problem.
Polymers, on the other hand, degrade long before reaching their vaporization temperatures, making it impossible to evaluate DEv directly. Fortunately, there is a way around this
impasse. The greatest tendency of a polymer to dissolve occurs when its solubility

THE SOLUBILITY PARAMETER

113

Swelling

Uncrosslinked
polymer

Lightly
crosslinked
polymer

δ Polymer
Solvent solubility parameter (δ)

FIGURE 7.3 Determination of polymer solubility parameter by swelling lightly crosslinked
samples in a series of solvents.

parameter matches to that of the solvent. If the polymer is crosslinked lightly, it cannot
dissolve but will only swell. The maximum swelling will be observed when the solubility
parameters of the polymer and the solvent are matched. So polymer solubility parameters
are determined by soaking lightly crosslinked samples in a series of solvents of known
solubility parameters. The value of the solvent’s d at which maximum swelling is observed
is taken as the solubility parameter of the polymer (Figure 7.3).
Solubility parameters of solvent mixtures can be readily calculated from
dmix ¼

Syi y i di
¼ Si di
Syi y i

ð7:5Þ

where
yi ¼ mole fraction of component i
vi ¼ molar volume of component i
i ¼ volume fraction of component i
Equation 7.5 has often been used to prepare a series of mixed solvents for establishing
the solubility parameter of a polymer as described above. Care must be exercised in this
application, however, because the liquid that winds up inside the swollen polymer is not
necessarily what you mixed up. In general, the crosslinked polymer will preferentially
absorb the better (closer d) solvent component, a phenomenon known as partitioning.
In the absence of specific data on solvents, a group-contribution method is available for
estimating both the solubility parameters and the molar volumes of liquids [1].
While the solubility-parameter concept has proved useful, there are unfortunately many
exceptions to Equation 7.4. First, regular solution theory that leads to Equation 7.2 has
some shortcomings in practice. Second, polymer solubility is too complex a phenomenon
to be described quantitatively with a single parameter. Several techniques have been
proposed that supplement solubility parameters with quantitative information on hydrogen
bonding and dipole moments [2,3]. One of the simplest of these classifies solvents into
three categories according to their hydrogen-bonding ability (poor, moderate, and strong).

114

POLYMER SOLUBILITY AND SOLUTIONS

Three different d ranges are then listed for each polymer, one for each solvent category.
Presumably, a solvent that falls within the d range for its hydrogen-bonding category will
dissolve the polymer. Another technique that has achieved widespread practical application
is discussed in the next section.
7.6

HANSEN’S THREE-DIMENSIONAL SOLUBILITY PARAMETER

According to Hansen [4–7], the total change in internal energy on vaporization, DEv, may
be considered as the sum of three individual contributions: one due to hydrogen bonds,
DEh, another due to permanent dipole interactions, DEp, and a third from dispersion (van
der Waals or London) forces, DEd:
DEy ¼ DEd þ DEp þ DEh

ð7:6Þ

Dividing by the molar volume v gives:
DEy DEd DEp DEh
¼
þ
þ
y
y
y
y

ð7:7Þ

d2 ¼ d2d þ d2p þ d2h

ð7:8Þ

or

where

dj ¼ ðDEj =yÞ1=2 ;

j ¼ d ;p;h

Thus, the solubility parameter d may be thought of as a vector in a three-dimensional d,
p, and h space. Equation 7.8 gives the magnitude of the vector in terms of its components. A
solvent, therefore, with given values of dp1, dd1, and dh1 is represented as a point in space,
with d being the vector from the origin to this point.
A polymer (being denoted as component 2) is then characterized by dp2, dd2, and dh2.
Furthermore, it has been found on a purely empirical basis that if dd is plotted on a scale
twice the size as that used for dp and dh, then all solvents that dissolve that polymer fall
within a sphere of radius R surrounding the point (dp2, dd2, and dh2).
Solubility judgments for the determination of R are usually based on visual observation
of 0.5 g polymer in 5 cm3 of solvent at room temperature. Given the concentration and
temperature dependence of the phase boundaries in Figure 7.1, this is somewhat arbitrary,
but it seems to work out pretty well in practice, probably because the boundaries are fairly
“flat” for polymers of reasonable molecular weight.
The three-dimensional equivalent of Equation 7.4 is obtained by calculating the
magnitude of the vector from the center of the sphere surrounding the solubility parameters
for the polymer (dp2, dd2, and dh2) to the point representing the solvent (dp1, dd1, and dh1). If
this is less than R, the polymer is deemed soluble:
h
i1=2
ðdp1  dp2 Þ2 þ ðdh1  dh2 Þ2 þ 4ðdd1 þ dd2 Þ2
< R for solubility
ð7:9Þ
(The factor 4 arises from the empirical need to double the dd scale to achieve a spherical
solubility region.)

HANSEN’S THREE-DIMENSIONAL SOLUBILITY PARAMETER

δd

115

10

9

8

7

3.5

6

8.6

5

1

1
2

2

3

3
4
5
6
7

3.0

4
2.0

5
6
7

8

8

δh

δp

FIGURE 7.4 The Hansen solubility sphere for PS (dd ¼ 8.6, dp ¼ 3.0, dh ¼ 2.0, ¼ 3.5) [5].

Figure 7.4 shows the solubility sphere for PS (dp ¼ 3.0, dd¼ 8.6, and dh¼2.0, R ¼ 3.5, all
in hildebrands) [4]. Note that parts of the PS sphere extend into regions of negative d. The
physical significance of these areas is questionable, at best.
The range of dd’s spanned by typical polymers and solvents is rather small. In practice,
therefore, the three-dimensional scheme is often reduced to two dimensions, with polymers
and solvents represented on dhdp coordinates with a polymer solubility circle of radius R.
Values of the individual components of dp, dd, and dh have been developed from
measured d values, theoretical calculations, studies on model compounds, and plenty of
computer fitting. They are extensively tabulated for solvents [4–9]. They, along with R, are
less readily available for polymers, but have been published [4,5,9]. Mixed solvents are
handled by using a weighted average for the individual dj components according to
Equation 7.5.
Despite its semiempirical nature, the three-dimensional solubility parameter has
proved to be of great practical utility, particularly in the paint industry, where the choice
of solvents to meet economic, ecological, and safety constraints is of critical importance. It is capable of explaining those cases in which the solvent and the polymer d’s are
almost perfectly matched, yet the polymer will not dissolve (the d vectors have the same
magnitudes, but different directions), or where two nonsolvents can be mixed to form a
good solvent (the individual solvent components lie on opposite sides outside the sphere,
the mixture within). Inorganic pigments may also be characterized by d vectors.
Pigments whose d vectors closely match to those of a solvent tend to form stable
suspensions in that solvent.

116

POLYMER SOLUBILITY AND SOLUTIONS

Example 7.3 A polymer has a solubility parameter d ¼ 9.95 (dp ¼ 7.0, dd ¼ 5.0, dh ¼ 5.0)
and a solubility sphere of radius R ¼ 3.0 (all numbers in hildebrands). Will a solvent with
d ¼ 10 (dp ¼ 8, dd ¼ 6, dh ¼ 0) dissolve it?
Solution. No. The solvent point lies in the dpdd plane (i.e., dh ¼ 0). The closest approach
the polymer solubility sphere makes to this plane is 5.03.0 ¼ 2. Thus, despite nearly
identical d’s the solvent will not dissolve the polymer.
7.7

THE FLORY–HUGGINS THEORY

Theoretical treatment of polymer solutions was initiated independently and essentially
simultaneously by Flory [10] and Huggins [11] in 1942. The Flory–Huggins theory is
based on the lattice model shown in Figure 7.2. For the case of the low molecular weight
solute (Figure 7.2a), it is assumed that the solute and the solvent molecules have roughly
the same volumes; each occupies one lattice site. With the polymeric solute (Figure 7.2b),
a segment of the polymer molecule (which corresponds roughly but not necessarily
exactly to a repeat unit) has the same volume as a solvent molecule and also occupies one
lattice site.
By statistically evaluating the number of arrangements possible on the lattice, Flory
and Huggins obtained an expression for the (extensive) configurational entropy changes
(those due to geometry alone), DS*, in forming a solution from n1 moles of solvent and n2
moles of solute:
DS ¼ Rðn1 ln 1 þ n2 ln 2 Þ

ð7:10Þ

where the ’s are volume fractions,
1 ¼

x1 n1
x1 n1 þ x2 n2

ð7:10aÞ

2 ¼

x2 n2
x1 n1 þ x2 n2

ð7:10bÞ

and the x’s are the number of segments in the species. For the usual monomeric solvent,
x1 ¼ 1. For a polydisperse polymeric solute, strictly speaking, a term must be included in
Equation 7.10 for each individual species in the distribution, but x2 is usually taken as xn ,
the number-average degree of polymerization, with little error. (Writing the volume
fractions in terms of moles implies equal molar segmental volumes.) Note that while 1,
2, and n1 are the same in Figures 7.2a and b, n2 ¼ 20 molecules for the monomeric
solute, but only 1 molecule for the polymeric solute.
Example 7.4 Estimate the configurational entropy changes that occur when
(a)

500 g of toluene (T, CH3) is mixed with 500 g of styrene monomer (S,
CH¼CH2)

THE FLORY–HUGGINS THEORY

117

(b) 500 g T is mixed with 500 g of PS, M n ¼ 100,000
(c) 500 g of PS, M n ¼ 100,000 is mixed with 500 g of polyphenylene oxide (PPO), (see
Example 2.4K), M n ¼ 100,000. (This is one of the rare examples where two high
molecular weight polymers are soluble in one another.)
Solution. MT ¼ 92, MS ¼ 104. Using these values and those given for the polymers, we get
ni ¼ 500 g/Mi. In the absence of other information, we must assume that the number of
segments equals the number of repeat units for the polymers. Therefore, xi ¼ M ni/mi, where
mi is the molecular weight of the repeat unit, mPS ¼ 104, mPPO ¼ 120. These quantities may
now be inserted in Equations 6.10, 6.10a, and 6.10b. The results are summarized below
(R ¼ 1.99 cal/molK):
i
(a) Toluene
Styrene
(b) Toluene
PS
(c) PS
PPO

ni (mol)

xi

i

5.44
4.81
DS* ¼ 14:1 cal=K
5.44
0.005
DS* ¼ 6:85 cal=K
0.005
0.005
DS* ¼ 0:0138 cal=K

1
1

0.531
0.469

1
962

0.531
0.469

962
833

0.536
0.464

The result for (c) illustrates why polymer–polymer solubility essentially requires a
negative DH.
An expression for the (extensive) enthalpy of mixing, DH, was obtained by considering the
change in adjacent-neighbor (molecules or segments) interactions on the lattice, specifically the replacement of [1,1] and [2,2] interactions with [1,2] interactions upon mixing:
DH ¼ RT x 2 n1 x1

½¼cal

ð7:11Þ

where x is the Flory–Huggins polymer–solvent interaction parameter. Initially, x was
interpreted as the enthalpy of interaction per mole of solvent divided by RT. By equating
Equations 7.2 and 7.11 (keeping in mind that the enthalpy in Equation 7.2 is based on a unit
volume of solution, while that in Equation 7.11 is an extensive quantity) and making use of
Equation 7.10a, it may be shown that the Flory–Huggins parameter is related to the
solubility parameters by
yðd1  d2 Þ2
ð7:12Þ
RT
where v is the molar segmental volume of species 1 and 2 (assumed to be equal). For the
dissolution of a polymer in a monomeric solvent (e.g., PS in styrene), v is taken as the molar
volume of the solvent, v1. Based on our knowledge of solubility parameters, we see that
Equation 7.12 predicts x  0. Actually, negative values have been observed.
x¼

118

POLYMER SOLUBILITY AND SOLUTIONS

If it is assumed that the entropy of solution is entirely configurational, substitution of
Equations 7.10 and 7.11 into Equation 7.1 gives
DG ¼ RTðn1 ln 1 þ n2 ln 2 þ x2 n1 x1 Þ

ð7:13Þ

Again, for the usual monomeric solvent, x1 ¼ 1. For a polydisperse solute, the middle
term on the right side of Equation 7.13 must be replaced by a summation over all the solute
species; however, treatment as a single solute with x2 ¼ xn usually suffices.
In terms of the Flory–Huggins theory, the criterion for complete solubility of a high
molecular weight polymer across the composition range is
x

0:5

for solubility

ð7:14Þ

It is now recognized that there is an interactive as well as a configurational contribution
to the entropy of solution, that is also included in the x term, so x is now considered to be a
DG (rather than strictly a DH) of interaction per mole of solvent divided by RT. The first two
terms on the right of Equation 6.13 therefore represent the configurational entropy
contribution to DG, while the third term is the interaction contribution and includes both
enthalpy and entropy effects.
The Flory–Huggins theory has been used extensively to describe phase equilibria in
polymer systems. It can, for example, qualitatively describe the lower phase boundary
(UCST) in Figure 7.1, although it rarely gives a good quantitative fit of experimental data.
Partial differentiation of Equation 7.13 with respect to n1 (keeping in mind that 1 and 2
are functions of n1) gives the chemical potential of the solvent. This is, of course, a key
quantity in phase equilibrium that also makes x experimentally accessible. Further
development is beyond the scope of this chapter, but the subject is well treated in standard
works on polymer solutions [12–15].
The limitations of the Flory–Huggins theory have been recognized for a long time. It
cannot predict an LCST (Figure 7.1). It is perhaps not surprising that x depends on
temperature, but it unfortunately turns out to be a function of concentration and molecular
weight as well, limiting practical application of the theory. These deficiencies are thought
to arise because the theory assumes no volume change upon mixing and the statistical
analysis on which it is based is not valid for very dilute solutions, particularly in poor
solvents. There has been considerable subsequent work done to correct these deficiencies
and extend lattice-type theories [16,17].
Experimental values for x have been tabulated for a number of polymer–solvent
systems, both single values [9] and even as a function of composition [8]. They may be
used with Equation 7.14 to predict solubility.
7.8

PROPERTIES OF DILUTE SOLUTIONS

Well, now that the thermodynamics have been covered, we know how to get the polymer
into solution, but how the polymer chains are organized in the solution is also important.
Let us initially assume that the polymer is in a fairly dilute solution, therefore we can
assume that there are very few entanglements between the polymer chains. Entanglements
begin to set in when the dimensionless Berry number (Be), the product of intrinsic viscosity
and concentration, exceeds unity [18]:
Be ¼ ½hc > 1

for entanglements

ð7:15Þ

PROPERTIES OF DILUTE SOLUTIONS

FIGURE 7.5

119

The effects of solvent power and temperature on a polymer molecule in solution.

For typical polymer–solvent systems, this usually works out to a few percent polymer.
In a “good” solvent (one whose solubility parameter closely matches that of the
polymer), the secondary forces between polymer segments and solvent molecules are
strong, and the polymer molecules will assume a spread-out conformation in solution.
In a “poor” solvent, the attractive forces between the segments of the polymer chain
will be greater than those between the chain segments and the solvent; in other words,
the chain segments “prefer their own company,” and the chain will ball up tightly (as in
Figure 7.5).
Imagine a polymer in a good solvent, for example, PS (d ¼ 9.3) in chloroform (d ¼ 9.2).
A nonsolvent is now added, say methanol (d ¼ 14.5). (Despite the large difference in
solubility parameters, chloroform and methanol are mutually soluble in all proportions
because of the large DS of solution for low molecular weight compounds.) Ultimately, a
point is reached where the mixed solvent becomes too poor to sustain solution, and the
polymer precipitates out because the attractive forces between polymer segments become
much greater than that between the polymer and the solvent. At some point, the polymer
teeters on the brink of solubility, DG ¼ 0 and DH ¼ TDS. This point obviously depends on
the temperature, polymer molecular weight (mainly through its influence on DS), and the
polymer–solvent system (mainly through its influence on DH). Adjusting either the
temperature or the polymer–solvent system allows fractionation of the polymer according
to molecular weight, as successively smaller molecules precipitate upon lowering the
temperature or going to poorer solvent.
In the limit of infinite molecular weight (the minimum possible DS), the situation
where DH ¼ TDS is known as the  or Flory condition. For a polymer of infinite molecular
weight in a particular solvent, the  temperature equals the UCST, indicating that the
solution is on the brink of phase separation. Under these conditions, the polymer–solvent
and polymer–polymer interactions are equal, and the solution behaves in a so-called ideal
fashion with the second virial coefficient equal to 0, etc., and the MHS exponent (Eq.
5.18) a ¼ 0.5.
For a given polymer,  conditions can be reached at a fixed temperature by adjusting the
solvent to give a  solvent or with a particular solvent by adjusting the temperature to reach
the  or Flory temperature. Any actual polymer will still be soluble under  conditions, of
course, because of its lower-than-infinite molecular weight and consequently larger DS.
Getting back to our example, we might ask what happens to the viscosity of the solution
upon moving from a good solvent to a poor solvent (to make a fair comparison, imagine

120

POLYMER SOLUBILITY AND SOLUTIONS

that as soon as a nonsolvent is added, an equivalent amount of good solvent is removed,
maintaining a constant polymer concentration). This question can be answered qualitatively by imagining the polymer molecules to be rigid spheres (they really are not) and
applying an equation derived by Einstein [19] for the viscosity of a dilute suspension of
rigid spheres:
h ¼ hs ð1 þ 2:5Þ

ð7:16Þ

where h is the viscosity of the suspension (solution), hs is the viscosity of the solvent, and
 is the volume fraction of the polymer spheres. (We further assume that the viscosities of
the low molecular weight liquids are comparable, i.e., that hs does not change.) Going
from good to poor solvent, the polymer molecules ball up, giving a smaller effective ,
lowering the solution viscosity. Thus, solution viscosity can be controlled by adjusting
solvent power.
Example 7.5 Indicate how solvent “power” (good solvent versus poor solvent) will
influence the following:
The intrinsic viscosity of a polymer sample at a particular T and the molecular
weight, M v , estimated by viscometry.
(b) The molecular weight of a polymer sample as determined by osmometry.
(a)

Solution. (a) The measured viscosities of solutions will be less in a “poor” solvent to that
in a good one, leading to lower intrinsic viscosity. The lower viscosity will
translate to a lower M v when calculated using the MHS Equation 5.18.
(b) If the membrane were ideal, solvent power would make no difference, since
osmometry measures only the number (moles) of solute per unit volume, regardless of geometry. Some of the smallest particles can sneak through any real
membrane, however. The poor solvent, causing the molecules to ball up tightly,
will allow passage of more molecules through the membrane. This will lower the
observed osmotic pressure causing the calculated M n to move on the high side.
Consider now the effects of temperature on the viscosity of a solution of polymer in a
relatively poor solvent. As is the case with all simple liquids, the solvent viscosity, hs,
decreases with increasing temperature. Increasing temperature, however, imparts more
thermal energy to the segments of the polymer chains, causing the molecules to spread out
and assume a larger effective  in solution. Thus, the effects of temperature on hs and 
tend to compensate, giving a solution that has a much smaller change in viscosity with
temperature than that of the solvent alone. In fact, the additives that are used to produce the
so-called multiviscosity motor oils (such as 10W-40) are polymers with compositions
adjusted so that the base oil is a relatively poor solvent at the lowest operating temperatures.
As the engine heats up, the polymer molecules uncoil, providing a much greater resistance
to thinning than is possible from oil alone (and preventing, at least as the commercials say,
“thermal breakdown”).
Viscosities (at low shear rates) of dilute solutions of polymers with known molecular
weights may be calculated using Equations 5.15, 5.16, and 5.18, reversing the procedure
for obtaining molecular weights from viscosity measurements.

POLYMER SOLUTIONS, SUSPENSIONS, AND EMULSIONS

121

Solvent
100%
Homogeneous
region
Two-phase
region

100%
Polymer
A

100%
Polymer
B

FIGURE 7.6 Typical ternary phase diaram for a polymer–polymer-common solvent system. The
dotted tie lines connect composition of phases in equlibrium.

7.9

POLYMER–POLMYER-COMMON SOLVENT SYSTEMS

As was illustrated in Example 7.3c, DS for the dissolution of one polymer in another is
extremely small. For this reason, the true solubility of one polymer in another is relatively
rare, although many more examples have come to light in recent years. When such
solubility does occur, it generally results from strong interactions (e.g., a large, negative
DH), most often hydrogen bonds, between the polymer pairs. Polymer–polymer miscibility
has been extensively reviewed [20,21].
For the far more common case where two polymers are insoluble in one another, even
when a common solvent is added (one that is infinitely soluble with each polymer alone),
the two polymers usually cannot coexist in a homogeneous phase beyond a few percent
concentration. A schematic phase diagram for such a system is shown in Figure 7.6.
Beyond a few percent polymer (the exact value depends on the chemical nature of the
polymers and the solvent and molecular weights of the polymers), two phases in
equilibrium are formed, each phase containing a nearly pure polymer. These results extend
to more than two polymers. In general, each polymer will coexist in a separate phase. This
fact was the basis of an early proposal for separating and recycling mixed plastic
waste [22].
7.10

POLYMER SOLUTIONS, SUSPENSIONS, AND EMULSIONS

Given a good solvent and a temperature between the UCST and LCST for a polymer–
solvent system, a homogeneous solution will form. The amount of polymer added will
certainly increase viscosity, but in any well-solvated polymer, the chains will expand,
uncoil, and allow many polymer–solvent interactions. For thermodynamically bad polymer–solvent combinations, polymer–polymer interactions are preferred, and each polymer
chain will be tightly coiled, leading to a two-phase system with a solid polymer precipitated
out. A suspension can be made by introducing energy of mixing, but this only spreads the
insoluble polymer out in a nonsolvent. When mixing is stopped, the polymer will settle out
again (think oil and water as in traditional Italian salad dressing). Polymer emulsions can

122

POLYMER SOLUBILITY AND SOLUTIONS

overcome this settling out through the introduction of surfactants—molecules that have
two distinct regions—one that is solvent-philic and the other polymer-philic. The surfactants line up along the interface between the polymer phase and the solvent phase, allowing
a stable emulsion to form (think emulsified salad dressings that require no shaking to mix).
Both polymer suspensions and emulsions are important in both reactions and final products
and are discussed in later chapters.
7.11

CONCENTRATED SOLUTIONS: PLASTICIZERS

Up to this point, we have considered relatively dilute polymer solutions. Now let us look at the
other end of the spectrum, where the polymer is the major constituent of the solution. A pure,
amorphous polymer consists of a tangled mass of polymer chains. The ease with which this
mass can deform depends on the ability of the polymer chains to untangle and slip past one
another. One way of increasing this ability is to raise the temperature, increasing segmental
mobility of the polymer chains. Another way is to add a low molecular weight (generally low
volatility) liquid to the polymer as an external plasticizer. By forming secondary bonds to the
polymer chains and spreading them apart, the plasticizer reduces secondary bonds in
polymer–polymer interactions. The plasticizer provides more room for the polymer molecules to move around, yielding a softer, more easily deformable mass. This corresponds well
with one of the major functions of plasticizers, lowering Tg.
Example 7.6 If you have ever heard baseball announcers comment that “On these humid
nights, the ball just isn’t hit as hard” or “A pitcher throws a heavier ball on these humid
nights,” you may have wondered if there was a scientific basis for these statements. They
cannot be justified in terms of the properties of the humid air (fluid dynamics). Can you
justify them in terms of the properties of the baseball? A baseball is made largely of tightly
wound wool yarn. Wool, a natural polymer, is similar, physically and chemically, to nylons
(see Example 7.1).
Solution. The polar linkages in wool with hydrogen bond to water. The higher the humidity,
the greater the equilibrium moisture content of the wool, accounting for the heavier ball.
The absorbed water will also act as an external plasticizer for the wool, softening it and
decreasing its resiliency. Just think what would happen if the baseballs were dunked in
water before a game!

Quantitative confirmation of Example 7.6 was provided by a noted technical journal,
Sports Illustrated, which, between swimsuit photos, reported on the effects of moisture on
the mass and resilience of baseballs [23]:
- Balls baked in a 212  F oven for 24 h lost 12 g and gained 5.8% in vigor.
- 24 h in a steam-filled moist room caused them to gain 11 g and lose 17.4 % of their
bounce.
A similar reversible plasticization of fibers by heat and moisture is applied in the
process of steam-ironing fabrics. Using a sizing agent (such as starch) in ironing also

CONCENTRATED SOLUTIONS: PLASTICIZERS

123

begins by plasticizing the clothing, but becomes rigid as the water evaporates (see
Example 7.2).
A thermodynamically poor plasticizer should be more effective than a good one,
giving a lower viscosity at a given level (smaller , fewer entanglements), but since it
is less strongly bound to the polymer, it will have a greater tendency to exude out over
a period of time, leaving the stiff polymer mass. This was a familiar problem with
some early imported cars. When parked in the sun, a greasy plasticizer film would
condense on the windows and, over a period of time, the upholstery and dashboard
would crack from loss of plasticizer. (Much of that new-car smell is due to plasticizers, which evaporate slowly, particularly in hot weather.) Thus, a balance must be
struck between plasticizers’ efficiency and permanence. Also from the standpoint of
permanence, it is necessary that the plasticizers have low volatility. Plasticizers
therefore, generally, have higher molecular weights than solvents (400–600 versus
100 or less for typical organic solvents), but are still well below the high polymer
range in this respect.
A polymer may be internally plasticized by random copolymerization with a monomer
whose homopolymer is very soft (has a low Tg, see Chapter 6). There are obviously never
any permanence problems when this is done. The composition of the copolymer can be
adjusted to give the desired properties at a particular temperature. Above this temperature,
the copolymer will be softer than intended and below this temperature, it will be harder.
With external plasticizers, the same sort of temperature compensation as in the multiviscosity motor oils is obtained, giving materials that maintain the desired flexibility over a
broader temperature range.
The most common externally plasticized polymer is poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC)
(CH2CHCl). A typical plasticizer for PVC is dioctyl phthalate (DOP), the diester
of phthalic acid and iso-octyl alcohol (note: DOP is the more common term in
industry, but the IUPAC name for this chemical is di(2-ethyl hexyl) phthalate or
DEHP):
CH3
H HCH
C O C
C (CH2)3 CH3
H
H
H
H
C O C
C (CH2)3 CH3
H HCH
O
CH3
O

PVC, because of its high chlorine content, is inherently fire resistant (see Chapter 18 for
other methods to make polymers fire resistant). Dilution of the PVC with a hydrocarbon
plasticizer increases flammability (especially important since many plasticizers are
included at 20 wt% or higher). Therefore, chlorinated waxes and phosphate esters, for
example, tricresyl phosphate (TCP), are used as plasticizers that maintain fire resistance.
So-called polymeric plasticizers, which are actually oligomers with molecular weights on
the order of 1000, provide low volatility and good permanence. It might also be noted that a
low molecular weight fraction in a pure polymer behaves as a plasticizer often in an
undesirable fashion.

124

POLYMER SOLUBILITY AND SOLUTIONS

Epoxidized plasticizers also perform the important function of stabilizing PVC. When
PVC degrades, HCl is given off that catalyzes further degradation. Not only that, HCl
attacks metallic molding machines, molds, extruders, etc. The epoxy plasticizers are made
by epoxidizing polyunsaturated vegetable oils:
H H
C C

+ H2O2

Catalyst

H H
C C
+ H2O
O
Oxirane ring

The oxirane rings soak up HCl and minimize further degradation (this is an admittedly
simplified view of a very complex phenomenon) [24]:
H H
C C
O

+ HCl

H
C

H
C

OH Cl

Having their origin in vegetable oils, these epoxidized plasticizers can often obtain FDA
clearance for use in food-contact applications. Further advances in plasticizers have been
reviewed [25].
Unplasticized (or nearly so) PVC is a rigid material used for pipe and fittings, house
siding, window frames, bottles, etc. The properties of plasticized PVC vary considerably
depending on the plasticizer level. Plasticized PVC is familiar as a gasket material, a
leather-like upholstery material (Naugahyde ), wire and cable covering, shower curtains,
water hoses, and packaging film.
Plastisols are an interesting and useful technological application of plasticized PVC. A
typical formulation might consist of 100 parts DOP phr (per hundred parts polymer resin)
plus some stabilizers, pigments, etc. Although the PVC is thermodynamically soluble in the
DOP at room temperature, the rate of dissolution of high molecular weight PVC at room
temperature is extremely low. Therefore, initially the plastisol is a milky suspension of finely
divided PVC particles in the plasticizer. As a suspension rather than a solution, the viscosity is
of the order of magnitude of that of the plasticizer itself (Eq. 6.16), and it can be applied to
substrates or molds by brushing, dipping, rolling, etc. When heated to about 350  F (175  C),
the increased thermal agitation of the polymer molecules speeds up the dissolution process
greatly. If there is no filler or pigment present, the solution process can be observed as the
plastisol becomes transparent. When cooled back to room temperature, the viscosity of the
solution is so high that for all practical purposes, it may be considered as a flexible solid.
Examples of plastisols include doll “skin,” toy rubber duckies, and the covering of wire dish
racks. Vinyl foam is also made by whipping air into a plastisol prior to fusion.
The viscosity of the initial suspension may be lowered by incorporating a volatile
organic diluent for the plasticizer, giving an organsol, or by whipping it in water to form a
hydrosol. In both cases, the diluent vaporizes upon heating.
Further discussion of the plasticized polymers is included in Chapter 18.
PROBLEMS
1

Crud Chemicals is using GPC for quality-control checks on their PS (d ¼ 9.3) product.
Normally, the column runs at 25  C with THF solvent (d ¼ 9.1). Unbeknownst to

PROBLEMS

125

them, a disgruntled former employee contaminated their THF supply with methanol
(d ¼ 14.5) before leaving. Being fairly sophisticated technically, he has loaded it up
pretty well without causing the polymer to precipitate out. How and why will this
affect the calculated average molecular weights?
2

Crud’s analytical laboratory corrects its solvent problem (see above), but the
temperature controller on their GPC column goes haywire, allowing the column
temperature to rise to 45  C without their knowledge. How and why will this affect
their calculated average molecular weights for PS?

3

Crud’s laboratory now wants to use the GPC column (from Problem 7.1) to analyze
copolymers of styrene (75%) with acrylonitrile (25%). Not having monodisperse
calibration standards for the copolymer, the scientists at Crud go ahead and use the
existing PS calibration. How and why will this affect their calculated average
molecular weights?

4

According to Hansen’s three-dimensional/solubility parameter scheme, which of the
following solvents will dissolve PS (Figure 7.4)? How well do these predictions agree
with Equation 7.4?
Solvent

dd

n-Hexane
7.28
Styrene
9.09
Methyl chloride
7.48
Acetone
7.58
Ethylacetate
7.72
Isopropanol
7.72
Phenol
8.80
All d’s are in (cal/cm3)1/2 ¼ hildebrands

dp

dh

0
0.49
3.0
5.08
2.6
3.0
2.9

0
2.0
1.9
3.4
3.5
8.02
7.28

5

Apply the general thermodynamic criteria for phase equilibria and derive equations
that would allow you to describe the lower-phase envelope in Figure 7.1 in terms of the
Flory–Huggins theory.

6

Show the derivation of Equation 7.12.

7

Sketch qualitatively how you would expect the molecular weight of the polymer to
affect the phase diagram in Figure 7.1.

8

Sketch qualitatively how you would expect the ternary phase diagram (Figure 7.6) to
be affected by: (a) polymer molecular weight and (b) temperature. Assume that the
polymer has UCST behavior in the solvent system.

9

Figure 7.6 illustrates a ternary phase diagram for a polymer–polymer-common solvent
system. Sketch qualitatively a ternary phase diagram for a polymer–solvent-nonsolvent system. Include tie lines and illustrate the effects of temperature and polymer
molecular weight on two additional diagrams. Assume that the solvent and nonsolvent
are soluble in all proportions, and that the polymer has UCST behavior.

10

Polymer solubility parameters can be determined through viscosity measurements.
Describe how you would do this.

126

POLYMER SOLUBILITY AND SOLUTIONS

11

A small amount of finely divided polymer is put into a beaker containing a liquid. The
beaker is covered and the contents are magnetically stirred with no change in the
milky appearance over several hours. The beaker is then uncovered, with the stirring
continued. The contents of the beaker gradually become transparent over a period of
several hours. Explain (there are at least two possibilities).

12

It has been proposed that a mixture of waste thermoplastics could be separated by
extraction with a single solvent by using different temperatures. That is, polymer A
would be extracted from the mixture at the lowest temperature, TA, polymer B at a
higher temperature TB, and so on, leading to nearly pure recovered polymers.
Comment on the thermodynamic feasibility of this proposal.

13

You are getting ready to challenge Tiger Woods to a day on the golf course, but to have
any shot to compete with Tiger, you decide to stack the odds in your favor by soaking
Tiger’s golf balls in a good solvent to reduce the distance the balls will fly off of the
golf tee. Choose an appropriate solvent that will swell the internal material of the golf
ball to reduce the momentum transfer from Tiger’s tee shots to help you “fix” the
game. (Check also to see if the solvent you choose will penetrate the Surlyn coating;
you may assume that the exposure time is small enough for the coating to remain
intact, but allows some solvent to penetrate.) Note: You will need to determine what
the core of a golf ball is made of and determine at least one solvent that will swell it;
you should also visit DuPont’s website and search for chemical resistance data for
Surlyn. Will the solvent increase or decrease the glass transition temperature of the
golf ball core?

REFERENCES
[1] Fedors, R.F., Polym. Eng. Sci. 14, 147, 472 (1974).
[2] Beerbower, A., L.A. Kaye, and D.A. Pattison, Chem. Eng. 74(26), 118 (1967).
[3] Seymour, R.B., Modern Plastics 48(10), 150 (1971).
[4] Hansen, C.M., J. Paint. Technol. 39(505), 104 (1967).
[5] Hansen, C.M., The Three Dimensional Solubility Parameter and Solvent Diffusion Coefficient,
Danishi Technical Press, Copenhagen, Denmark, 1967.
[6] Hansen, C.M. and A. Beerbower, Solubility parameters, in Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, Suppl. Vol., 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1971.
[7] Hansen, C.M., Ind. Eng. Chem. Prod. Res. Dev. 8, 2 (1969).
[8] Brandrup, J. and E.H. Immergut (eds), Polymer Handbook, 3rd ed., Wiley-Interscience, New
York, 1989.
[9] Barton, A.F.M., Handbook of Polymer-Liquid Interaction Parameters and Solubility Parameters, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1990.
[10] Flory, P.J., J. Chem. Phys. 10, 51 (1942).
[11] Huggins, M.L., Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 43, 1 (1942).
[12] Flory, P.J., Principles of Polymer Chemistry, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 1953.
[13] Morawetz, H., Molecules in Solution, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1975.
[14] Tompa, H., Polymer Solutions, Butterworths, London, 1956.
[15] Kwei, T.K., Macromolecules in solution, Chapter 4 in Macromolecules: An Introduction
to Polymer Science, F. A. Boveyand F.H. Winslow (eds), Academic, New York, 1979.

REFERENCES

127

[16] Sanchez, I.C. and R.H. Lacombe, Macromolecules 11(6), 1145 (1978).
[17] Pesci, A.I. and K.F. Freed, J. Chem. Phys. 90(3), 2017 (1989).
[18] Hager, B.L. and G.C. Berry, J. Polym. Sci.: Polym. Phys. Ed. 20, 911 (1982).
[19] Einstein, A., Ann. Phys. 19, 289 (1906); 34, 591 (1911).
[20] Olabisi, O., L.M. Robeson, and M.T. Shaw, Polymer-Polymer Miscibility, Academic, New
York, 1979.
[21] Coleman, M.M., J.F. Graf, and P.C. Paniter, Specific Interactions and the Miscibility of Polymer
Blends, Technomic, Lancaster, PA, 1991.
[22] Sperber, R.J. and S.L. Rosen, Polym. Eng. Sci. 16(4), 246 (1976).
[23] Sports Illustrated, Time, Inc., July 20, 1970, p. 22.
[24] Anderson, D.F. and D.A. McKenzie, J. Polymer Sci.: A-1, 8, 2905 (1970).
[25] Rahman, M. and C.S. Brazel, Prog. Polym. Sci., 29, 1223 (2004).

PART II

POLYMER SYNTHESIS

In Part I, molecular organization of polymers and functional groups required for their
formation have been introduced. It also included some of the important chemical
characteristics needed to understand crystallinity, thermal behavior, and solubility. This
part discusses the reaction mechanisms and factors influencing the formation of polymers.
We have already discovered in Chapter 2 that the primary polymerization mechanisms are
condensation (or step-growth) polymerization (Chapter 8), and free-radical (or addition)
polymerization (Chapter 9). Some advanced techniques for polymerizations that result in
more specifically tailored structures are covered in Chapter 10. Chapter 11 introduces the
concept of reactivity ratios for copolymerization, as the growth of polymer chains is not
entirely random. Finally, Chapter 12 discusses industrial methods of polymer synthesis, the
equipments required, and how some of the challenges in working with high molecular
weight viscous materials can be circumnavigated. This part of the book may be thought of
as polymerization reaction engineering.

Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen
Ó 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

129

CHAPTER 8

STEP-GROWTH (CONDENSATION)
POLYMERIZATION

8.1

INTRODUCTION

Polymerization reactions may be divided into two categories according to the mechanism
by which the chains grow. In step-growth polymerization, also known as condensation
polymerization, chains of any lengths x and y can combine to form longer chains:
x-mer þ y-mer ! ðx þ yÞ-mer

ðstep growthÞ

ð8:1aÞ

In chain-growth (also known as addition or free-radical) polymerization, a chain of any
length x can only add a monomer molecule to continue its growth:
x-mer þ monomer ! ðx þ 1Þ-mer

ðchain growthÞ

ð8:1bÞ

These two mechanisms generally require different organic functional groups, carboxylic
acids, amines, alcohols, etc., for step-growth and alkenes for chain-growth. Another
distinction that you may have picked up on in Chapter 2 is that the molecular weight
of the monomer and the repeat unit are generally the same for chain-growth polymers, but
the repeat unit is smaller (due to the condensation of water) for most step-growth polymers.
This is not always true, since some condensation polymerizations do not split out a water
molecule (see Examples 2.4F and 2.4Q). This chapter covers step-growth polymerization,
while chain-growth polymerization is considered in Chapters 9 and 10.
Regardless of the type of polymerization reaction, quantitative treatments are usually
based on the assumption that the reactivity of the functional group at a chain end is
independent of the length of the chain, x and y in Equations 8.1a and 8.1b. Experimentally,
this is an excellent assumption for x’s greater than five or six. Since most polymers must
develop x’s on the order of a hundred (or much greater) to be of practical value, this
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

131

132

STEP-GROWTH (CONDENSATION) POLYMERIZATION

assumption introduces little error while enormously simplifying the mathematical treatment. With these basic concepts in mind, we proceed to a more detailed and quantitative
treatment of polymerization reactions.
8.2

STATISTICS OF LINEAR STEP-GROWTH POLYMERIZATION

Consider the two equivalent linear step-growth reactions, assuming difunctional monomers
and stoichiometric equivalence:
x
x
ARA þ BR0 B ! ARA½-BR0 B  ARA-ðx1Þ BR0 B*
2
2
2

ð8:2aÞ

xARB ! ARB½-ARB-x2 ARB

ð8:2bÞ

where A and B represent the complementary functional groups. It is important to note that
x is used here to denote the number of monomer residues or structural units in the chains,
rather than repeat units (which would be either [BR0 B-ARA] or [ARB]1).
Each of the polymer molecules above contains a total of x A groups:
one unreacted A group ðon the endÞ and
x  1 reacted A groups;
so x still represents the degree of polymerization with either repeat unit listed above.
Considering a volume of the reaction mixture at a certain time during polymerization,
we can use statistical analysis to find the polymer chain length and average molecular
weight. For this analysis, we will let
p ¼ probability of finding a reacted A group
¼ number or mole fraction of reacted A groups present
¼ conversion or extent of reaction of A groups
ð1  pÞ ¼ the probability of finding an unreacted A group
N ¼ the total number of molecules present in the reaction mass ðof all sizesÞ
nx ¼ the number of molecules containing x A groups; both reacted and unreacted

N¼

1
X

!
nx

x1

The total probability of finding a molecule with x A groups (reacted and unreacted) is equal
to the mole or number fraction of those molecules present in the reaction mass nx/N. This,
in turn, is equal to the probability of finding a molecule with x  1 reacted A groups and
one unreacted A group. Since the overall probability is the product of the individual
probabilities,
1
Some of the molecules formed in this type of reaction will be capped with two A groups. For each of these,
however, stoichiometric equivalence requires that there should be one capped with two B groups, so Equation 8.2a
represents the average reaction.

NUMBER-AVERAGE CHAIN LENGTHS

0.04

133

p = 0.90, –x n = 10

0.03

nx
— 0.02
N

0.01

p = 0.95, –x n = 20
p = 0.98, –x n = 50
p = 0.99, –x n = 100

0

50

100

150

200

x

FIGURE 8.1 Number- (mole-) fraction distributions for linear step-growth polymers at different
conversions (Eq. 8.3).

nx
¼ pðx1Þ ð1  pÞ ¼ mole ðnumberÞ fraction x-mer
N

ð8:3Þ

This is the so-called most probable distribution. It results from the random nature of the
reaction between chains of different lengths, which will produce polymers of various
lengths at any time during the reaction. As the reaction proceeds with time, the conversion
increases to yield longer chains. The distribution is plotted in Figure 8.1 for several
conversions, p. Note that at any conversion, the shorter chains are always more numerous,
that is, the longer the chain, the fewer the chain. Also, the fraction of short chains decreases
with conversion, while the fraction of long chains increases with conversion, because
increasing conversion hooks together shorter chains to form longer chains.
Because each growing polymer chain has two functional groups (one at each end), stepgrowth polymerizations can involve reactions between monomers, oligomers, or polymers
of any length, x:
1-mer
2-mer
5-mer

þ
þ
þ

1-mer
3-mer
95-mer

!
!
!

2-mer
5-mer
100-mer

This is an unique characteristic of step-growth polymerizations and contrasts with chaingrowth polymerizations (Chapter 9) that add only monomers (1-mers) to growing chains
(Eq. 8.2b).
8.3

NUMBER-AVERAGE CHAIN LENGTHS

Since a distribution of chain lengths always arises in polymerization reactions, the average
chain length is often of interest. Each molecule in the reaction mass has, on an average, one
unreacted A group. If No is the original number of molecules present in the reaction mass,
there are No unreacted A groups present at the start of the reaction. At some time later
during the reaction there are fewer molecules (N), and therefore N unreacted A groups are
present, so No  N of the A groups have reacted. Thus,

134

STEP-GROWTH (CONDENSATION) POLYMERIZATION

p¼

N0  N
¼ fraction of reacted A groups present
No

ð8:4Þ

Because the No original monomer molecules are distributed among the N molecules present
in the reaction mass, the average number of monomer residues per molecules, xn , is given
by
xn ¼

No
¼ average number of monomer residues per molecule
N

ð8:5Þ

Combining Equations 8.4 and 8.5 gives
xn ¼

1
1p

ðCarothers’ equationÞ

ð8:6Þ

This rather simple conclusion was reached by W.H. Carothers, the discoverer of nylon and
one of the founders of polymer science, in the 1930s. (The same result may be obtained in a
more laborious fashion by inserting Equation 8.3 into Equation 5.24.) Its importance
becomes obvious when it is realized that typical linear polymers must have xn values on the
order of at least 100 to achieve useful mechanical properties. This requires a conversion of
at least 99%, assuming difunctional monomers in perfect stoichiometric equivalence. Such
high conversions are almost unheard in most organic reactions, but are necessary to achieve
high molecular weight condensation polymers.
Since condensation reactions are reversible, many step-growth polymerizations would
reach equilibrium at low conversions if the low molecular weight product of the reaction
(usually condensed water) were not efficiently removed (e.g., by heat and vacuum or by a
second reaction) to drive the reaction to high conversions.
Example 8.1 Crud Chemicals is producing a linear polyester in a batch reactor by the
condensation of a hydroxy acid HORCOOH. It has been proposed to follow the progress of
the reaction by measuring the amount of water removed from the reaction mass. Assuming
pure monomer, and that all the water of condensation can be removed and measured, derive
for them an equation relating xn of the polymer to No, the moles of monomer charged to the
reactor, and M, the total moles of water evolved since the start of the reaction.
Solution. In this polycondensation reaction, each reacted OH (or COOH) group
produces one molecule of water. Therefore, the moles of reacted OH (or COOH)
groups is M. The probability of finding a reacted group (of either kind) is
p¼

M moles reacted  OH groups
¼
N0
total moles  OH groups

Plugging into Carothers’ Equation 8.6 yields
xn ¼

1
1  ðM=No Þ

NUMBER-AVERAGE CHAIN LENGTHS

135

So far, we have only discussed polymerizations where there is a stoichiometric balance
of A and B groups (which is always true for monomers such as hydroxy acids, as
shown in Example 8.1). However, if the number of A and B groups is not equal, the
length of the chains formed will be reduced (even at 100% conversion!). As an
analogy to explain the result of an imbalanced stoichiometric feed, assume that each
person in a classroom is a monomer—girls are AA’s and boys are BB’s. They have to
link hands girl–boy–girl, etc. If there are an equal number of boys and girls, a
complete ring can be made with all hands connected. However, if there are fewer girls
in the class, then there will be several B hands that are left unlinked, even when all of
the girls’ A hands are connected. This causes a serious drop in the molecular
weight for condensation polymers and is of utmost importance in designing reactors
for step-growth polymerizations. We can use similar (but more involved) reasoning for
Example 8.1 to derive
xn ¼

1þr
1þr
¼
2rð1  pÞ þ ð1  rÞ 1 þ r  2rp

ð8:7Þ

where r ¼ NA0/NB0 is the stoichiometric ratio of the functional groups present (A is taken
to be the limiting reactant, so r is always less than or equal to 1, and p represents the
fraction of A groups reacted).
To examine the effect of stoichiometric imbalance, consider the limiting case of
complete conversion, p ¼ 1, for which Equation 8.7 reduces to
ðxn Þmax ¼

1þr
1r

ðfor p ¼ 1Þ

ð8:8Þ

When A and B groups are supplied in stoichiometric equivalence (r ¼ 1), all the
reactant molecules are combined in a single molecule of essentially infinite molecular weight. Reducing r to 0.99 reduces ðxn Þmax to 199, and for r ¼ 0.95, all the way
down to 39. This is an extremely important concept! To reach the large chain lengths
needed for useful materials, step-growth polymerizations must have functional
groups supplied at or very close to stoichiometric equivalence. Considering the
usual industry purity levels and precision of weight techniques, this is not always
easy to achieve. One way to avoid this problem is to use a difunctional monomer of
the type ARB, with the stoichiometric equivalence built into the monomer. This is
not always feasible or possible, so many step-growth polymerization reactions also
require careful reactor design. For the production of nylon 6/6, for example, where
adipic acid (ARA) and hexamethylene diamine (BR0 B) are used as the monomers
(see Example 2.4E), the monomers form an ionic salt of a perfect 1:1 ratio (“nylon
salt”), which is carefully purified by crystallization before polymerization. Another
option for forming nylons is to use interfacial polymerization, with each monomer in
a separate liquid phase (see Chapter 12). Also, chain length may sometimes be
pushed up despite an initial stoichiometric imbalance by eliminating excess amount
of a reactant. For example, if a polyester is made from a diacid plus and an excess
amount of glycol, the reaction must stop at a point when all the chains are capped by
OH groups. If the glycol is volatile enough to be driven off by applying heat and
vacuum, however, the chains may combine further with the elimination of excess
amount of glycol:

136

STEP-GROWTH (CONDENSATION) POLYMERIZATION

O
O
O
O
HO–R–O–[C–R′–C–O–R–O]–x- H + H [–O–R–O–C–R′– C ]–y O–R–OH
O
O
HO–R–O–[C–R′–C–O–R–O]–(x
- +y) H + HO–R–OH

On the other hand, reducing r by the deliberate introduction of an excess amount of one
of the monomers or of some monofunctional material provides a convenient means of
limiting chain length when desired.
8.4

CHAIN LENGTHS ON A WEIGHT BASIS

The previous development of the distribution of chain lengths (Chapter 5) in a linear stepgrowth polymer, although perfectly legitimate, is in some ways misleading, because it
describes the number of molecules of a given chain length present and equally counts both
monomer units and chains containing many hundreds of monomer units, that is, each is one
molecule. For example, in a mixture consisting of one monomer molecule and one 100mer, the number or mole fraction of each is 1/2. Another way of looking at it is to inquire
about the relative weights of the various chain lengths present. On this basis, the weight
fraction of monomer in the mixture is only 1/101. (This assumes that the monomer and the
repeat unit have the same molecular weight.) By neglecting the weight of the small
molecule that splits out in condensation reactions, we can most simply obtain the weightfraction distribution of chain lengths by combining Equations 5.33, 8.3 and 8.6 to get
wx
¼ xpðx1Þ ð1  pÞ2
W

ð8:9Þ

This “most-probable” weight fraction distribution is shown in Figure 8.2. Although the
smaller molecules (monomers, dimers, trimers, etc.) are the most numerous, their

0.04
p = 0.90, –x n = 10
0.03

wx
— 0.02
W

p = 0.95, –x n = 20

0.01

0

p = 0.98, –x n = 50

50

100

p = 0.99, x–n = 100
150

200

x

FIGURE 8.2

Weight-fraction distributions for linear step-growth polymers (Eq. 8.9).

137

GEL FORMATION

combined weight is an insignificant portion of the total weight. It should be noted that stepgrowth polymerization typically results in very few monomers, as most of them react to
form at least dimers or trimers. This is an important point of contrast with chain-growth
polymerization (Chapter 9), where only large molecular weight polymers and monomers
exist as the conversion increases. In the figure, the peak is at x ¼ 1/(ln p)  1/(1  p), that
is, the x-mer present in greatest weight is approximately xn. The neglect of a molecule of
condensation (reacted and unreacted A groups do not have the same weight, but each of
them is part of one monomer residue) in this derivation can lead to significant errors at low
x’s. The exact solution is quite complex [1].
The weight-average chain length, xw , can be obtained by inserting the number
distribution, Equation 8.3 into Equation 6.23 and integrating at constant p:
Ð1

Ð 1 2 ðx1Þ
ðnx =N Þx2 dx
xp
dx 1 þ p
¼ Ð01 ðx1Þ
¼
1p
ð
n
=N
Þx
dx
xp
dx
x
0
0

xx ¼ Ð01

ð8:10Þ

(Evaluation of the above integrals is a good exercise for mathematical masochists!)
Combining Equations 8.10 and 8.6 gives an expression for the polydispersity index in
terms of conversion:
xw
¼ 1 þ p ð0  p  1Þ
xn

8.5

ð8:11Þ

GEL FORMATION

If a step-growth polymerization batch contains some monomer with a functionality f > 2 and
if the reaction is carried to a high enough conversion, a cross-linked network or gel may be
formed (Figure 8.3). In this context, a gel is defined as a molecule of essentially infinite
molecular weight, extending throughout the reaction mass. In the production of thermosetting
polymers, the reaction must be terminated short of the conversion at which a gel is formed or
A B–B A

A
A
A

A
A

+

A B–B

A

B

B–B

A
A B–B

A
B–B A

A

A

A

A B–B

A B–B A

A

A
B

B

A
B

B

B

A B–B A

A B–B A

A

A
A
A B–B

A

A
B–B A

A

A B–B
A

Beginning monomers

Low conversion, linera
and branched polymers

High conversion,
crosslinked polymers

FIGURE 8.3 Time course of reaction of multifunctional A to difunctional B monomer. First small
polymers are formed that are not crosslinked, but as enough A and B groups react, a tight network
forms.

138

STEP-GROWTH (CONDENSATION) POLYMERIZATION

Unreacted end

ain

Ch

Chain

Branch units

FIGURE 8.4 A growing polymer chain with two branch points indicating the position of the
trifunctional monomers that have been added.

the product could not be molded or processed further (crosslinking is later completed in the
mold). Hence, the prediction of this gel point conversion is of great practical importance.
The multifunctional monomer is represented by Af for example,
A
A

A
A

A

A
A
f=4

f=3

while the reaction mixture usually also consists of difunctional monomers of the form ARA
and BR0 B. In a gel network, the multifunctional monomer acts as a branch unit. These
branch units are connected to chains, which are linear segments of difunctional units, that
lead either to another branch unit or to an unreacted end (Figure 8.4).
The branching coefficient a is defined as the probability that a given functional group on a
branch unit is connected to another branch unit by a chain (rather than to an unreacted end).
Further analysis is based on two assumptions. (1) All functional groups are equally
reactive. This might not always be true. For example, the secondary (middle) hydroxyl
group in glycerin (HOCH2CH(OH)CH2OH) is probably not as reactive as the primary
(end) hydroxyls, due to steric hindrances. (2) Furthermore, intramolecular condensations
(or polymer back-biting, i.e., reactions between A and B groups on the same molecule) do
not occur. In other words, each reaction between an A and a B reduces the number of
molecules in the reaction mass by one.
Consider the reaction:
Branch
unit

Linear
chain

Branch
unit

AA + BB + A f → A f-1 A– [BB–AA–]i BB–AA f-1
1

2

3

4

where
r ¼ fraction of the total A groups in the branch units Af
(1  r) ¼ fraction of the total A groups in the difunctional AA molecules
pA ¼ probability of finding a reacted A group
pB ¼ probability of finding a reacted B group
The probabilities of finding each of the numbered types of bonds in the polymer shown on
the right of the above reaction are tabulated below.

GEL FORMATION

Bond

Probability of Formation

1
2
3
4

pA
pB(1  r)
pA
pB r

139

probability of A reacting with B
probability of B reacting with A on AA
probability of A reacting with B
probability of B reacting with A on Af

Therefore, the probability of finding the chain shown, which, counting from left to
right, contains 1-type one bond, i-type two bonds, i-type three bonds, and 1-type four
bond is:
pA ½pB ð1  rÞpA i pB r
From the standpoint of connecting branch units, i may have any value between zero and
infinity. Thus, to obtain the probability of finding a chain of any i that connects the branch
units, we must sum over all i to find the branching coefficient:
a¼

1
X

pA ½pB ð1  rÞpA i pB r ¼

i¼0

pA pB r
1  pA pB ð1  rÞ

ð8:12Þ

Now,
NA0
NB0

ð8:13Þ

pA ¼

NA0  NA
NA0

ð8:14Þ

pB ¼

NB0  NB
NB0

ð8:15Þ

r¼

From the stoichiometry of the reaction, the number of reacted A groups must be equal to the
number of reacted B groups:
NA0  NA ¼ NB0  NB

ð8:16Þ

NA0
pA ¼ rpA
NB0

ð8:17Þ

rp2A r
p2B r
¼
2
1  rpA ð1  rÞ r  p2B ð1  rÞ

ð8:18Þ

Therefore,
pB ¼
and
a¼

140

STEP-GROWTH (CONDENSATION) POLYMERIZATION

Each of the terminal branch units in the polymer molecule on the right above has (f  1)
unreacted functional groups. If at least one of these unreacted A groups is then connected to
another branch unit, a gel is formed. Since all the unreacted A groups on branch units are
statistically identical, all the branch units in the reaction mass will be connected together by
chains, which is our definition of a gel. (In general, there will still be some monomer and
linear chains floating throughout the gel network, i.e., the reaction mass is not a single
molecule at the gel point.) This occurs when a (f  1)  1, that is, when the product of the
probability of a chain connecting a given functional group to another branch unit and the
number of remaining unreacted functional groups becomes a certainty. Thus, the critical
value of the branching coefficient for gelation is:
ac ¼

1
f 1

ð8:19Þ

Combining Equations 8.18 and 8.19 gives the gel-point conversion, rc.
Example 8.2 Calculate the gel-point conversion of a reaction mass consisting of 2 mol of
glycerin plus 3 mol of phthalic anhydride.
H H H

O
C
O

2 HO–C–C–C–OH + 3
H O H
H

C
O



O
C–OH

=
C–OH
O



Solution. By convention, A should be chosen as the functional group on the multifunctional
monomer. Here, A ¼ OH, f ¼ 3, and ac ¼ 0.5 (Eq. 8.19). Note that there is no difunctional
AA molecule in this problem. Also, NA0 ¼ NB0, so r ¼ 1. Since all the A (OH) groups are
on the multifunctional (glycerin) molecules, r ¼ 1. Plugging these values into Equation 8.18 and solving gives pA ¼ 0.707.
Experimentally, the gel-point conversion for the system in Example 8.2 was found to be
pA ¼ 0.765. This was done by noting the conversion at which bubbles ceased to rise in the
reaction mass. The difference between the experimental and the theoretical results can be
accounted for by some intramolecular condensation (back-biting) and the lower reactivity
of the secondary hydroxyls at the center of the glycerin molecules. Also, Bobalek et al. [3]
showed that as large molecules grew within the reaction mass, their molecular weights
became high enough to cause them to precipitate from the solution before a true, infinite gel
network was formed (a particle just 1 mm in diameter has a molecular weight in the order of
1011 g/mol). Higher conversions were needed experimentally to link these precipitated
particles together to prevent the rise of bubbles.
Regardless of the reasons, however, the theoretical calculation usually gives the lower
limit, or most conservative value, for the gel-point conversion, giving a margin of safety in
practice. An apparent exception can sometimes occur. In concentrated solutions, physical
entanglements of chains can cause a polymer to behave as a crosslinked gel at conversions
lower than that predicted by this theory. Also, in the preparation of unsaturated polyester

GEL FORMATION

141

resins (see Example 2.3), the double bond that would be assumed inert in the condensation
reaction participates in crosslinking reactions during condensation polymerization. This, in
effect, makes the value of f much greater than that for condensation alone, which results
in premature gelling. Additional crosslinking is normally counteracted by incorporating an
inhibitor (see Chapter 9) for addition reactions during the polycondensation (step-growth)
reaction.
Example 8.3 Calculate the minimum number of moles of ethylene glycol (I) needed to
produce a gel when reacted with 1 mol of phthalic anhydride (II) and 1 mol of BTDA (III).
O
C
HO–CH2–CH2–OH

O

O
C

O

O
C
O

C
O
(I)

O
C

O
C

(II)

C
O
(III)

Solution. First, recognize that BTDA (III) is a dianhydride and, therefore, can be
considered a tetrafunctional acid. Again, A is by convention the functional group on the
multifunctional monomer. Here, A ¼ COOH, and (I) ¼ BB, (II) ¼ AA, and (III) ¼ A4.
The tendency toward gelation increases with conversion, and with the minimum moles
of (I) present, A groups will be in stoichiometric excess so that B is the limiting reactant.
Therefore,
ðpB Þmax ¼ 1:0

for minimum ðIÞ

and from Equation 8.19:
ac ¼

1
1
1
¼
¼
f 1 41 3

Here,
r¼

moles A on ðIIIÞ
4 2
¼ ¼
moles A on ½ðIIÞ þ ðIIIÞ 6 3

At the gel point, with pB ¼ 1 and r ¼ 2/3, using Equation 8.18,
1
rp2A r
p2B r
¼
¼
2
3 1  rpA ð1  rÞ r  p2B ð1  rÞ
r¼

7 NA0
¼
3 NB0

 
NA0
3
18
¼6
NB0 ¼
¼
r
7
7

142

STEP-GROWTH (CONDENSATION) POLYMERIZATION

But, NB0 ¼ 2 NI, that is, there are two moles of hydroxyl per mole of glycol. Therefore,
NI ¼

8.6

NB0 18 9
¼
¼ mol
2
14 7

KINETICS OF POLYCONDENSATION

We now know something about the chemistry of forming step-growth polymers and about
the relation of the length of the polymer chains with the reaction conversion; but how long
do these reactions occur? The kinetics of polycondensation reactions is similar to that of
ordinary condensation reactions. Since the average chain length is related to conversion in
linear polycondensation by Equation 8.7, and the conversion is given as a function of time
by the kinetic expression, xn is directly related to the reaction time and can thus be
controlled by limiting the reaction time. Similarly, the time to reach a gel point is related by
the rate expression and Equations 8.18 and 8.19. The rate of reaction depends on several
parameters, including the concentrations of monomer species, as demonstrated in Example
8.4, and the temperature (through usual Arrhenius behavior, in that an increase in
temperature raises kinetic rate constants and speeds up the reaction rate, see Chapter 9).
Example 8.4 For a second-order, irreversible polycondensation reaction with rate proportional to the concentrations of reactive A and B groups, obtain expressions for conversion
and number-average chain length as a function of time for a stoichiometrically equivalent
batch.
Solution. For a second-order reaction, assuming constant volume,
d½A
¼ k½A½B
dt

ð8:20Þ

where k is the reaction-rate constant and the brackets indicate concentrations. For
[A]o ¼ [B]o, [A] ¼ [B] at all times, and
d½A
¼ k½A2
dt

ð8:21Þ

Separating variables and integrating between the limits when t ¼ 0, [A] ¼ [A]o and when
t ¼ t and [A] ¼ [A] gives
1
1
¼ kt

½A ½A0

ð8:22Þ

p ¼ ð½A0  ½AÞ=½A0 ¼ ð½A0 ktÞ=ð1 þ ½A0 ktÞ:

ð8:23Þ

Since

PROBLEMS

143

combining Equations 8.6 and 8.23 gives
xn ¼ 1 þ ½A0 kt

ð8:24Þ

Therefore, the number-average chain length increases linearly with time.
Two cautions are in order about the preceding example. First, by writing an irreversible rate
expression, we have assumed that any molecule of condensation is being continuously and
efficiently removed from the reaction mass so that there is no depolymerization. Second,
not all step-growth reactions are of second order. Some polyesterifications, for example, are
catalyzed by their own acid groups and are, therefore, first order in hydroxyl concentration,
second order in acid, and third order overall. The rate may also be proportional to the
concentration of an added catalyst (usually acids or bases for polycondensations), if used.
References 4 and 5 provide a more comprehensive and detailed look at step-growth
polymerizations, extending and applying many of the concepts introduced here.
PROBLEMS
1

Crud Chemicals wishes to limit chain length in their linear polycondensation reaction
by adding monofunctional B to the equimolar AA, BB reactant mix. Obtain an
expression for the maximum number-average chain length possible at 100% conversion, ðxn Þmax , when NB moles of B are added per mole of AA or BB.

2

One mole of hydroxybutyric acid (HO(CH2)3COOH) is placed in a reactor that
reaches 50% conversion.
(a) How many moles of unreacted COOH groups are left in the reactor? How many
moles of unreacted monomer are left in the reactor?
(b) What are the average M n , M w , and PDI for the reaction mixture?

3

Polycarbonate is made by mixing 20 kg bisphenol A with 15 kg phosgene (see
Example 2.4N) in a batch reaction. What are the maximum number-average chain
length, xn, and maximum number-average molecular weight, Mn, of this polymer?

4 (a)

Starting with Example 8.3, calculate the maximum number of moles of ethylene
glycol that could be added to the reaction mixture to form a gel when reacted
with 1 mol of phthalic anhydride and 1 mol of BTDA.
(b) Sketch qualitatively a triangular ternary diagram for the A4, AA, BB system at
maximum conversion that shows the gel and no-gel regions. (A sample ternary
diagram is shown in Figure 7.6.) Locate the solution to part (a) and the solution to
Example 8.3 in your sketch.
(c) Describewhathappenstopreventgelformation“justacrosstheborder”ineachcase.

5

Calculate the gel point conversion (based on the limiting reactant) for reacting 3 mol
ethylene glycol (Example 2.4D) with 1 mol of tetrafunctional butyl dianhydride
(Example 2.4R, but replace the “R” group with (CH2)4).

6 (a)

Modify Equation 8.18 to handle a condensation reaction batch that contains
monofunctional B in addition to the Af, A–A and B–B present in the original

144

STEP-GROWTH (CONDENSATION) POLYMERIZATION

analysis. You will need to include one additional stoichiometric parameter:
b ¼ fraction of total B’s on the B--B molecules:
(b)

(c)

Oil-based paints are made by condensing glycerin, phthalic anhydride, and a
drying oil. The drying oil is an unsaturated monoorganic acid R-COOH (e.g.,
linseed oil). The paint film is crosslinked after application of an addition reaction
involving the double bonds in R. Since the polymer must be soluble for
application, it cannot be allowed to form gel during the condensation reaction.
With a 2/3 ratio of glycerin/phthalic anhydride, what is the minimum amount of
drying oil that must be incorporated in the reaction mass to prevent gel formation
during the condensation reaction?
For the type of Af, B–B, B system in (b), sketch qualitatively a ternary diagram
similar to the one in Figure 7.6 showing the gel/no-gel composition regions at
maximum conversion. Locate the solution to (b) in the diagram.

7 (a)

How many moles of monofunctional A must be added to a mixture of 1 mol of
BB and 1 mol of A3 to prevent gelation at maximum conversion?
(b) Sketch a ternary diagram for the A3, BB, A system showing the gel/no-gel
regions at maximum conversion. Locate the solutions to part (a) in your sketch.

8

Modify the bond probability of the formation table in Section 8.5 to handle a reaction
mass that contains monofunctional A in addition to the AA, BB, and Af present in the
original analysis. You will need one additional stoichiometric parameter:
a ¼ fraction of A groups on the monofunctional A’s:

9

See Example 8.2. Given 1 mol of glycerin, over what range may the moles of phthalic
anhydride be varied with the possibility of forming a gel?

10

Calculate the gel/no-gel boundaries and plot the ternary diagram showing the gel/nogel regions for the A3, BB, B system at maximum conversion.

11

Crud Chemicals is producing a casting resin that consists of an AB-type monomer to
which a catalyst is added to promote polymerization in the mold. The material has
many useful properties but is deficient in heat and solvent resistance. A proposal is
made to improve heat and solvent resistance by adding a tetrafunctional monomer to
the mix to provide crosslinks. Unfortunately, no one in-house knows if this will work
or how to calculate the minimum amount of A4 needed to form a gel; Therefore, they
call you in as a consultant. Evaluate the proposal for them.

12

A step-growth polymerization is started with the following initial composition:
A3
AA
B
BB

1 mol
1 mol
1 mol
2 mol

At pA ¼ 0.5, what is the numerical probability of ﬁnding one branch unit connected to
another by a single BB?

REFERENCES

145

13

Calculate the minimum number of moles of phthalic anhydride needed to form a gel
when reacted with 1 mol each of glycerin, ethylene glycol, and propylene glycol.

14

Obtain the expression that relates xn to time for a linear polyesterification that is
catalyzed by its own acid groups, that is, second order in COOH and first order in OH.
Assume an irreversible reaction at constant volume and [A]o ¼ [B]o.

15

Assume that the reaction in Example 8.2 follows the kinetic scheme outlined in
Section 8.6. Obtain an expression (in terms of the rate constant k) for the time to reach
the gel point tgel.

REFERENCES
[1] Grethlein, H.E., Ind. Eng. Chem. Fund. 8, 206 (1969).
[2] Flory, P.J., Principles of Polymer Chemistry, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 1953.
[3] Bobalek, E.G., et al., J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 8, 625 (1964).
[4] Gupta, S.K. and A. Kumar, Reaction Engineering of Step-Growth Polymerizations, Plenum,
New York, 1987.
[5] Odian, G., Principles of Polymerization, Wiley, New York, 1991.

CHAPTER 9

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION
(CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

9.1

INTRODUCTION

One of the most important types of addition polymerization is initiated by the action of
free-radicals, electrically neutral species with an unshared electron. Free-radicals are
highly reactive and these types of polymerizations begin with the formation of free-radicals
by an initiation reaction. In the developments to follow, a dot () will represent a single
electron or free-radical. The single bond, a pair of shared electrons, will be denoted by a
double dot (:) or, where it is not necessary to indicate electronic configurations, by the usual
covalent bond sign (). A double bond, two shared electron pairs, is indicated by :: or ¼.
Free-radicals for the initiation of addition polymerization are usually generated by the
breakdown of a chemical initiator. These initiators are classified by the method used to
catalyze the breakdown: thermal initiators, redox initiators, or photo initiators.
Thermal initiators form free-radicals by the thermal decomposition of compounds such
as organic peroxides or azo compounds. Two common examples of thermal initiators are
benzoyl peroxide and azobisisobutyronitrile:
O
O
f–C–O:O–C–f

O
2 f –C–O•

(CH3)2 –C:N=N:C–(CH3)2
C
C
N
N

2 f • + 2CO2
2(CH3)2 –C• + N2
C
N

To start these reactions, moderately high temperatures (70–100  C) are needed.
Redox initiators form free-radicals by an oxidation–reduction reaction using chemicals such
as ammonium persulfate, usually in combination with an accelerator, such as N,N,N0 ,N0 Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

146

MECHANISM OF POLYMERIZATION

147

FIGURE 9.1 Comparison of reactor contents at 50% conversion (a) step-growth or condensation
polymerization and (b) addition (or free-radical) polymerization. M ¼ monomer.

tetramethyl ethylene diamine. These reactions can begin a polymerization at lower temperatures.
Photo initiators are used less frequently, but can form free-radicals upon exposure to (usually)
ultraviolet light. In each case, one initiator molecule forms two free-radicals, often with the
formation of a gas. Once the free-radical is formed from the initiator, the polymerization can
begin.In contrast to step-growth polymerizations, where condensation can occur between two
units of any chain length, addition polymerizations add monomers one at a time to a growing
polymer chain (Figure 9.1). This has an important consequence for forming large chains: in
addition polymerizations, at any given time during the reaction, the remaining monomer can be
easily separated (by evaporation), leaving behind high molecular weight polymers that are
mechanically useful (even at somewhat low conversions); recall that for step-growth polymers,
conversions topping 99% are required to get even moderate molecular weight materials.
9.2

MECHANISM OF POLYMERIZATION

The initiator molecule, represented in a generic sense by I, undergoes a first-order
decomposition with a rate constant kd to give two free-radicals, 2 R:
kd

I!2R 

Decomposition

ð9:1Þ

This reaction has a rate constant kd. The radical then adds a monomer by grabbing an
electron from the electron-rich double bond, forming a single (RC) bond with the
monomer, but leaving an unshared electron at the other end:
H H

HH

R• + C::C → R:C:C•
H X

HX
Addition (Activation)

This may be abbreviated by
ka

R  þ M!P1 

Addition

ð9:2Þ

where M is the monomer, and P1 represents a growing polymer with a single repeat unit
with a free-radical attached to the other carbon that used to be part of the double bond. The
rate constant for addition is ka. Note that the initiator radical actually combines with the
monomer, so when a polymer is formed by this method, the end group is normally different
from the normal repeat units of the polymer. Fortunately, due to the large size of most

148

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

polymers, the end group supplied by the initiator is normally insignificant and is usually
ignored. The other important thing to notice from Equation 9.2 is that the product of the
addition reaction is still a free-radical; thus, it proceeds to propagate the chain by adding
another monomer unit:
kp

P1  þ M!P2 
again maintaining the unshared electron at the chain end, which adds another monomer
unit:
kp

P2  þ M!P3 
and so on. In general, this propagation step is written as
kp

Px  þ M!Pðxþ1Þ 

ð9:3Þ

Propagation

where kp is the rate constant for the propagation step. We have again assumed that reactivity is
independent of chain length by using the same kp for each propagation reaction.
The chains continue to grow as long as monomers continue to be available and
accessible in the reaction mixture. The reaction ends by a termination step using one of
two methods. Two chains can bump together and stick, with their unshared electrons
combining to form a single bond between them (combination):
H H
C–C •
H X

+

Px • + Py •

•

H H
C–C
X H

kte

P(x + y)

H H H H
C–C :C–C
H X X H

ð9:4aÞ

Combination

where P(xþy) is a dead polymer chain of (x þ y) repeating units. Or, one can abstract a
proton from the penultimate carbon on the other forming two dead chains with lengths x
and y (disproportionation):
H H
C–C •
H X

+

Px • + Py •

•

H H
C–C
X H
ktd

H H
C=C :
X
Px + Py

+

H H
:
H C–C

Disproportionation

X H

ð9:4bÞ

The relative proportion of each termination mode depends on the particular polymer and
the reaction temperature, but in most cases, one or the other predominates. Note that
another potential method for terminating a polymerization reaction is by chain transfer,
where the free-radical is transferred to another species in the reaction mixture, such as a
solvent, as discussed in Section 9.6.
9.3

GELATION IN ADDITION POLYMERIZATION

A significant portion of Chapter 8 was devoted to describing gelation and the formation
of network polymers by step-growth polymerization, including the gel point conversion, ac, for such reactions. In free-radical polymerizations, all monomers have the

KINETICS OF HOMOGENEOUS POLYMERIZATION

149

same reactive functional group (the alkene double bond). Monomers that have only one
C¼C produce linear polymers, but those with two or more alkenes normally result in
branch points and the formation of crosslinked networks. Such multifunctional monomers are termed crosslinking agents, and need only be added at 1 mol% (or even less) to
successfully form a network. Because free-radical polymers add monomers to long
growing chains, these crosslinking agents are added just as the other monomers and
begin to form crosslinked networks, even at low conversions (particularly if the amount
of crosslinking agent is high). The three-part mechanism (initiation, propagation, and
termination) is largely the same as above. The most important parameters in determining the structure of these polymers are the fraction of crosslinking agents added and
their functionality (number of double bonds). The resulting structures are characterized
by M c, the molecular weight between crosslinks. Lightly crosslinked gels will swell
appreciably in a good solvent, while those made with high concentrations of crosslinking agents are often brittle and easily crack. Because a gel point conversion is much
less important for networks made by free-radical polymerization, no further discussion
is included in this chapter.
9.4

KINETICS OF HOMOGENEOUS POLYMERIZATION

Free-radical polymerizations can take place in either homogeneous (single phase) or
heterogeneous (multiple phase) mixtures. In this section, we will consider only
homogeneous reactions, where the monomer is either reacted in bulk or a good
solvent is used so that the monomer, initiator, and polymers of all lengths are soluble in
a single phase. To determine the rate of polymerization, we must consider the rates of
each of the steps (initiation, addition, propagation, and termination) involved in the
mechanism.
In practice, not all the radicals generated in Equation 9.1 actually initiate chain growth
as in Reaction (9.2). Some recombine through the reverse reactions, or others are used up
by side reactions. Thus, f, the fraction of radicals generated in the initiation step that
actually initiate chain growth through Reactions 9.1 and 9.2, is important in developing rate
equations:
ri ¼

 

l
dP1 
¼ 2fkd ½I  Initiation rate
V
dt

ð9:5Þ

where V is the volume of the reaction mass, P1 is the moles of chain radicals with x ¼ 1,
and [I] is the initiator concentration (moles/volume). In the notation used here, the
quantity Q of a species without brackets represents the moles of the species and when
enclosed in square brackets, [Q], the molar concentration of the species. They are
related by
½Q ¼

Q
V

ð9:6Þ

Although it is rarely mentioned explicitly, Equation 9.5 is based on the generally valid
assumption that the rate of Reaction (9.2) is much greater than that of Reaction (9.1), that
is, the initiator decomposition is rate controlling. Thus, as soon as an initiator radical is

150

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

formed, it grabs a monomer molecule, starting chain growth, so ka does not appear in the
rate expression.
According to Reaction (9.3), the rate of monomer removal in the propagation step is
  
1
dM
¼ kp ½M ½P   Propagation rate
ð9:7Þ
rp ¼ 
V
dt p
where M is the moles of monomer and [P] is the total concentration of growing chain
radicals of all lengths:
½P   ¼

1
X
½Px  

ð9:8Þ

x¼1

The rate of removal of chain radicals is the sum of the rates of the two termination
reactions. Since both are second order
 

1
dP 
¼ 2kt ½P  2 Termination rate
ð9:9Þ
rl ¼ 
V
dt
where the termination rate constant, kt, adds the rate constants for termination by
combination (ktc) and by disproportionation (ktd):
kt ¼ ktc þ ktd

ð9:10Þ

Unfortunately, the unknown quantity [P] is present in the equations. It cannot be
measured during a reaction, but can be removed from the equations by making the standard
kinetic assumption of a steady-state concentration of a transient species, in this case, the
chain radicals, such that d[P]/dt ¼ 0 during the reaction. For [P] to remain constant, chain
radicals must be generated at the same rate at which they are removed. Thus, we assume
that the rates of initiation and termination must be equal (ri ¼ rt), or
2fkd ½I ¼ 2kt ½P  2
This gives the chain-radical concentration as


fkd ½I 1=2
½P   ¼
kr

ð9:11Þ

ð9:12Þ

which, when inserted into Equation 9.7 provides an expression for the rate of monomer
consumption in the propagation reaction:
 1=2
  
1
dM
fkd
¼ kp
½I1=2 ½M 
rp ¼ 
kr
V
dt p

ð9:13Þ

One molecule of monomer is consumed in the addition step (Eq. 9.2) also, but for long
chains this is insignificant, so that Equation 9.13 may be taken as the overall rate of
polymerization, the rate at which monomer is converted to polymer.
Equation 9.13 is the classical rate expression for a homogeneous, free-radical polymerization. It has been an extremely useful approximation over the years, particularly in
fairly dilute solutions, but deviations from it are sometimes observed. It is now evident that
many deviations are due to the fact that the termination reaction is diffusion controlled, so
kt is not really a constant but decreases in time as the polymerization proceeds. In certain

KINETICS OF HOMOGENEOUS POLYMERIZATION

151

cases of practical interest, these deviations can be of major significance. They are discussed
in Chapter 12 on polymerization practice.
It is often more convenient to work in terms of monomer conversion X. By making use of
the definition of conversion:
X

M0  M
M0

ð9:14Þ

and Equation 9.6 for M, we can rewrite Equation 9.13 as
 1=2
dX
fkd
¼ kp
½I1=2 ð1  XÞ
kl
dt

ð9:13aÞ

Note that the conversion X used here is a very different quantity than the p used in
Chapter 8 for step-growth polymers. Here, X is the fraction of monomer molecules
that have reacted to form polymer. The quantity p represents the fraction of
functional groups that have reacted (whether on a monomer or part of a growing
polymer chain). In step-growth polymerization, each monomer molecule has several
functional groups that react independently, so p is not the fraction of reacted
monomer. (Compare to free-radical addition, where both sides of the double bond
are reacted in sequence.)
Integration of Equation 9.13a gives conversion as a function of time. A form
occasionally used in studying the initial stages of an isothermal, batch reaction is
obtained by assuming a constant initiator concentration [I]o with the initial condition
X ¼ 0 at t ¼ 0:
(
)
 1=2
fkd
1=2
½I0 t
ðconstant ½I Þ
ð9:15Þ
X ¼ 1  exp kp
kl
The assumption of constant [I] may not be realistic at high conversions for two
reasons. First, the initiator concentration can decrease significantly with time. Second,
the volume of the reaction mass will, in general, change with conversion. Most liquidphase addition polymerizations undergo a density increase of 10–20% from pure
monomer (X ¼ 0) to polymer (X ¼ 1) (carrying out the reaction in an inert solvent
reduces this, of course).
We can include the first-order initiator decay:
  
 
1
dI
I
¼ kd ½I  ¼ kd
V
dt
V

ð9:16aÞ

and integrate from t ¼ 0 with I ¼ Io to get
I ¼ I0 expðkd tÞ

ð9:16bÞ

We then assume that the volume of the reaction mass is linear with conversion, as outlined
by Levenspiel [1]:
V ¼ V0 ð1 þ «XÞ

ð9:17Þ

152

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

where « is the fractional change in volume from X ¼ 0 to X ¼ 1 and Vo is the volume of the
reaction mass at X ¼ 0. Combining Equations 9.6 (for I), 9.13, 9.16b, and 9.17 gives
 1=2


dX
fkd
1X
kd t
1=2
½I0
exp
¼ kp
ð9:18Þ
kt
dt
2
ð1 þ «XÞ1=2
The variables in Equation 9.18 may be separated and it may be integrated analytically
with respect to time, at least, to give
  1=2



ðx
2kp
ð1 þ «XÞ1=2
fkd
kd t
1=2
dX ¼
½I0 1  exp
ð9:19Þ
1X
kd
kt
2
0
Unfortunately, the left side of Equation 9.19 cannot be integrated analytically by normal
human beings. An explicit expression for X as a function of t is extremely difficult to
determine, so calculation of X(t) is normally done by numerical or by computational
methods.
If we can neglect volume change (« ¼ 0), we can solve the integral explicitly to get
   
 


2kp
fkd
kd t
1=2
½I0 exp
1
ð« ¼ 0Þ
ð9:20Þ
X ¼ 1  exp
kd
kt
2
This expression has some interesting and important implications when compared with
Equation 9.15. Setting t ¼ 1 reveals that there is a maximum attainable conversion that
depends on [I]o:
(   
)
2kp
fkd 1=2 1=2
½I0
ð« ¼ 0Þ
ð9:21Þ
Xmax ¼ 1  exp 
kd
kt
This “dead-stop” situation is basically a matter of the initiator being used up before the
monomer, but it is not revealed by Equation 9.15, which always predicts complete
conversion in the limit of infinite time. Thus, the use of Equation 9.15 instead of
Equation 9.19 or 9.20 can result in considerable error at high conversions, although the
results approach one another at low conversions.
Example 9.1 For the homogeneous polymerization of pure styrene with azobisisobutyronitrile at 60  C in an isothermal, batch reactor,
(a) compare Equations 9.15, 9.19, and 9.20 by plotting conversion versus time, using
the data given below,
(b) calculate and compare the times needed to reach 90% conversion according to
Equations 9.15, 9.19, and 9.20, and
(c) determine the minimum [I]o needed to achieve 90% conversion. Note that according
to Equation 9.15, there is no minimum.
Data: kp2 =kt ¼ 1:18  103 L=mol;
kd ¼ 0:96  105 s
½Io ¼ 0:05 mol=L
f ¼1
« ¼ 0:136ð13:6% shrinkage from monomer to polymerÞ

INSTANTANEOUS AVERAGE CHAIN LENGTHS

153

1.00
0.90

(10.15)

0.80

(10.19)
(10.20)

Conversion

0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

0

5

10

15

20

25 30
Time (h)

35

40

45

50

FIGURE 9.2 Conversion versus time for an isothermal, free-radical batch polymerization (data of
Example 9.2): Equation 9.15, [I] ¼ constant; Equation 9.19, « ¼ 0.136; Equation 9.20, « ¼ 0.

Solution. (a) Equations 9.15 ([I] constant) and 9.20 (V constant) may be solved analytically,
but Equation 9.19 (both [I] and V changing) requires a numerical solution. The results are
shown in Figure 9.2. Graphically, Equations 9.19 and 9.20 are almost indistinguishable.
Note that volume shrinkage increases concentrations and speeds up the reaction slightly.
(b) Numerical solution of Equation 9.19 gives a time of 34.0 h to reach 90% conversion.
Neglecting initiator decay and solving Equation 9.15 for t gives 26.9 h (21% low!) and
neglecting volume change (Eq. 9.20) gives 36.1 h (6.2% too high). In many cases, the error
introduced by neglecting volume change is probably less than the precision with which the
rate constants are known. The error will, however, increase with higher conversions.
(c) Numerical solution of Equation 9.19 with t ¼ 1 gives a minimum [I]o
of 0.00989 mol/L for 90% conversion. Solving Equation 9.21 with Xmax ¼ 0.90 gives
[I]o ¼ 0.0108, a 9.07% error from neglecting volume change.

Side reactions cause deviations from the classical kinetics. Agents that cause these
reactions are generally categorized as inhibitors or retarders (though accelerators can
also be used). An inhibitor delays the start of the reaction, but once begun, the reaction
proceeds at the normal rate. Liquid vinyl monomers are usually shipped with a few parts
per million of inhibitor to prevent polymerization in transit. A retarder slows down the
reaction rate, which can be used to allow a reacting mixture to be worked with before
setting. Some chemicals combine both effects. These are illustrated in Figure 9.3. Oxygen
is a free-radical scavenger, so it behaves as an inhibitor for free-radical polymerization;
thus, these reactions are normally carried out under a blanket of nitrogen.
9.5

INSTANTANEOUS AVERAGE CHAIN LENGTHS

As in step-growth polymerization, a distribution of chain lengths is always obtained in a
free-radical addition polymerization because of the inherently random nature of the
termination reaction with regard to chain length. Expressions for the number-average

154

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

FIGURE 9.3

Change in reaction behavior due to inhibitor or retarder.

chain length are usually couched in terms of the kinetic chain length, n, which is the rate of
monomer addition to growing chains over the rate at which chains are started by initiator
radicals, that is, the average number of monomer units per growing chain radical at a
particular instant.1 It thus expresses the efficiency of the initiator radicals in polymerizing
the monomer:
v¼

rp
kp ½M
¼
ri 2ðfkd kt Þ1=2 ½I1=2

ð9:22Þ

If the growing chains terminate exclusively by disproportionation, they undergo no change
in length in the process, but if combination is the exclusive mode of termination, the
growing chains, on average, double in length upon termination. Therefore,
xn ¼ v

ðtermination by disproportionationÞ

ð9:23aÞ

xn ¼ 2v

ðtermination by combinationÞ

ð9:23bÞ

The average chain length may be expressed more generally in terms of a quantity j, the
average number of dead chains produced per termination reaction, which equals the ratio of
the rate of dead chain formation to the rate of termination reactions. Since each
disproportionation reaction produces two dead chains and each combination one,
Rate of dead chain formation ¼ ð2ktd þ ktc Þ½P  2

ð9:24Þ

Note that n only includes the growing polymer chains, ignoring the monomer (X ¼ 1) remaining in the reactor.
This is different from the calculations of xn in Chapter 8 for step-growth polymers, but is reflective of the length of
polymers formed in free-radical polymerizations, assuming that the monomer remaining at the end of the reaction
is separated from the polymer.
1

TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF RATE AND CHAIN LENGTH

Rate of termination reactions ¼ ðktc þ ktd Þ½P  2
j¼

ktc þ 2Ktd ktc þ 2Ktd
¼
ktc þ Ktd
kt

155

ð9:25Þ
ð9:26Þ

The instantaneous number-average chain length is the rate of addition of monomer units to
all chains (rp) over the rate of dead chain formation:
xn ¼

kp ½P  ½M
2

ð2ktd þ ktc Þ½P  

¼

kp ½M
jðfkd kt Þ1=2 ½I1=2

ð9:27aÞ

When ktd  ktc, j ¼ 2, and when ktc ktd, j ¼ 1, duplicating the previous result, but
Equation 9.27a can also handle various degrees of mixed termination.
Keeping in mind that xn is one of the most important factors in determining certain
mechanical properties of polymers, what is the significance of Equation 9.27a A growing
chain may react with another growing chain and terminate, or it may add another
monomer unit and continue its growth. The more monomer molecules that are in the
vicinity of the chain radical, the higher the probability of another monomer addition,
hence the proportionality to [M]. On the other hand, the more initiator radicals that are
present competing for the available monomer, the shorter the chains will be, on an
average, causing the inverse proportionality to the square root of [I]. Equation 9.13
shows that the rate of polymerization can be increased (always an economically
desirable goal) by increasing both [M] and [I], the former being more efficient than
the latter. However, there is an upper limit to [M] set by the density of the pure monomer
at the reaction conditions. So it is often tempting to increase [I] to attain higher rates. But
according to Equation 9.27a, this unavoidably lowers xn . You cannot have your cake and
eat it, too.

9.6

TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF RATE AND CHAIN LENGTH

We may assume that the temperature dependence of the individual rate constants in each of
the steps of the reaction are given by the Arrhenius expression:

ki ¼ Ai exp

Ei
RT


ð9:28Þ

where ki is the rate constant for a particular elementary reaction, Ai is its frequency factor,
and Ei is its activation energy. This expression is common in chemical kinetics, and results
in the rule of thumb that for every 10  C increase in temperature, the rate approximately
doubles (which holds for temperatures around 300 K). Because most addition polymerizations are exothermic, the temperature of the reaction mixture increases during the
polymerization, which causes an increase in the kinetic rate constants, which raises the
temperature even faster, and so on, causing a run-away reaction. This behavior is related to
the Tromsdorff effect, whereby chain termination occurs more quickly than expected,
leading to lower molecular weight chains. This subject is covered in more detail in Chapter
12, Polymerization Practice.

156

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

If we neglect the temperature dependence of f, Equation 9.13 becomes


ðEp þ Ed =2  Et =2Þ
rp ¼ Cexp
RT


ð9:29Þ

where C combines temperature-independent quantities into a single constant and Ep þ
Ed/2  Et/2 is the effective activation energy for polymerization. Therefore, between two
(absolute) temperatures T1 and T2:


rp ðT2 Þ ðEp þ Ed =2  Et =2Þ 1
1
¼

ln
rp ðT1 Þ
R
T2 T 1

ð9:30Þ

Similar treatment of Equation 9.27a, with the assumption that j is independent of
temperature, results in:


xn ðT2 Þ ðEp  Ed =2  Et =2Þ 1
1
ln
¼

R
xn ðT1 Þ
T 2 T1

ð9:31Þ

where Ep  Ed/2  Et/2 is the effective activation energy for the number-average chain
length.
Example 9.2 For a typical free-radical addition reaction, Ep  Et/2 ¼ 5 kcal/mol and
Ed ¼ 30 kcal/mol. Estimate the changes in rp and xn for a typical homogeneous, freeradical addition polymerization when the temperature is raised from 60 to 70  C.
Solution. The effective activation energy for polymerization is þ20 kcal/mol. Inserting this
into Equation 9.30 along with T1 ¼ 273 þ 60 ¼ 333 K, T2 ¼ 273 þ 70 ¼ 343 K, and R
¼ 1.987 cal/mol-K gives:

ln

rp ð70  CÞ
¼ 0:879
rp ð60  CÞ

and

rp ð70  CÞ
¼ 2:41ð!Þ
rp ð60  CÞ

that is, the rate increases by 141% (or more than double) over the given 10  C temperature
interval. This rather spectacular (and sometimes dangerous) sensitivity is mainly due to the
large activation energy for the rate-controlling initiator decomposition.
The effective activation energy for xn is 10 kcal/mol. With Equation 9.31, we get
ln

xn ð70  CÞ
¼ 0:439
xn ð60  CÞ

and

xn ð70  CÞ
¼ 0:644
xn ð60  CÞ

so xn is subject to a 35.6% decrease over the same temperature range.

CHAIN TRANSFER AND REACTION INHIBITORS

9.7

157

CHAIN TRANSFER AND REACTION INHIBITORS

In practice, another type of reaction sometimes occurs in free-radical addition polymerizations. These chain-transfer reactions kill a growing chain radical and can start a new one
in its place (as long as the radical transfers to another monomer):
ktr

0

0

R : H þ Px  !Px þ R 

ð9:32aÞ

0
ka

0

R  þ M!P1 

ð9:32bÞ

etc:

Thus, chain transfer results in shorter chains, and if the reactions in Equation 9.32a are not
too frequent compared to the propagation reaction and do not have very low rate constants,
chain transfer will not change the overall rate of polymerization appreciably.
The compound R0 :H in the above reaction is known as a chain-transfer agent. They are
also sometimes referred to as chain terminating agents, because the free-radical on the
growing polymer Px is removed. Under appropriate conditions, almost anything in the
reaction mass may act as a chain-transfer agent, including initiator, monomer, solvent, and
dead polymer.
Reaction inhibitors can also change the polymerization rate. Inhibitors for addition
polymerizations are typically free-radical scavengers—chemicals that can gobble up freeradicals quickly and prevent or slow the initiation and propagation steps of the polymerization mechanism. Oxygen is one such scavenger, and in some addition polymerizations,
even oxygen dissolved in the reaction mixture must be removed to obtain appreciable
molecular weight polymers. Other inhibitors are often added to monomers being shipped
so that they do not autopolymerize before a reaction is desired. Quinone-type chemicals are
often used in this capacity.
Example 9.3 Show, using dots to represent the electrons involved, how chain transfer to a
dead polymer leads to long-chain branching in polyethylene.
Solution.
H H
C–C •
H X

+

Growing chain

H H
C–C:H
H H

H H H
C–C–C
H H H
Dead chain

+

H H H
C–C–C
H
H

Terminated chain

New chain radical

H H
C::C
H H

H H H
C—–C—–C
H HCH H

H H H
C–C–C
H
H
Chain radical

+

Monomer

HCH
Chain with
growing branch

158

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

Example 9.4 Show, as above, how short branches arise in polyethylene when a growing
chain “bites its own back,” that is, the radical transfers to an atom a few [5–8] carbon atoms
down the chain.
Solution.
H H H HH H
C–C–C–C–C–C •
H H H HH H

H H H HH H
C–C–C–C–C–C:H
H H HH H

Growing chain

Site for contination
of chain growth

H H H HH H
C–C–C–C–C–C–H
H H HH H

H H H HH H
C–C–C–C–C–C–H
H H HH H

+ M

5 C-atom branch
Propagating chain

Most frequently, mercaptans (also known as thiols), the sulfur analogs of alcohols (R0 S:H),
are added to the reaction mass as effective chain-transfer agents to lower the average chain
length.
The rate of dead chain formation by chain transfer
 

h 0
i
1
dP 
¼ ktr R : H ½P  
rtr ¼ 
V
dt tr

ð9:33Þ

must be added to the denominator of Equation 9.27a to give the total rate of dead chain
formation:
xn ¼

kp ½P  ½M
0

ð2ktd þ ktc Þ½P  2 þ ktr ½R : H½P  

ð9:34Þ

Using Equations 9.12 and 9.26 gives
xn ¼

kp ½M
0

jðfkd þ kt Þ½I1=2 þ ktr ½R : H

ð9:35Þ

Taking the reciprocal of Equation 9.35 gives
0

1
1
½R : H
¼
þC
xn ðxn Þo
M

ð9:36Þ

where C is the chain-transfer constant ¼ ktr/kp and ðxn Þo is simply the average chain length
in the absence of chain transfer from Equation 9.27a. Thus, a plot of 1=ðxn Þ versus [R0 :H]/
[M] is linear with a slope of C and intercept of 1=ðxn Þo .

CHAIN TRANSFER AND REACTION INHIBITORS

159

Example 9.5 Prove that the use of a chain-transfer agent with C ¼ 1 will maintain the ratio
[R0 :H]/[M] constant in a batch reaction.
Solution.
0

0

0

0

rtr ð1=VÞðdR : H=dtÞ d½R : H ktr ½R : H½P  
½R : H
¼C
¼
¼
¼
rp
ð1=VÞðdM=dtÞ
d½M
kp ½M½P  
½M
Separating variables and integrating gives
0

Ð ½R0 :H d½R : H
0

Ð ½M d½M
¼ C ½M o
o ½M
½R : H
0
1C
0
½R : H
½M A
¼@
0
½Mo
½R : Ho

½R :Ho

0

ð9:37Þ

Therefore, only if C ¼ 1, will ([R0 :H]/[M]) ¼ ([R0 :H]o/[M]o) ¼ constant.
Values of C greater than one use up chain-transfer agent too quickly, leaving nothing to
modify the polymer formed at high conversions, while low values leave a lot of unreacted
chain-transfer agent around toward the end of the reaction when enough is used to be
effective at the beginning. If the agent happens to be a mercaptan, and if you have ever
smelled a mercaptan (rotten eggs), you can appreciate what a problem leftover agent can
be. These problems are circumvented by (1) adding an active (C > 1) agent over the course
of the reaction, and (2) using mixtures of active (C > 1) and sluggish (C < 1) chaintransfer agents in the initial charge.
Example 9.6 Generalize Equation 9.36 to incorporate transfer to a variety of different
possible transfer agents, Si:
ktr  r

Px  þ Si !Px þ Si 
Solution. The rate of dead chain formation from transfer to agent Si must be added to the
denominator of Equation 9.27a:
xn ¼

kp ½P  ½M
P
ð2ktd þ ktc Þ½P  2 þ ktr;i ½Si ½P  
i

Invoking Equations 9.12 and 9.26 gives
xn ¼

kp ½M
jðfkd kt Þ½I1=2 þ

P
i

ktr;i ½Si 

160

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

or
X ½Si 
1
1
¼
þ
Ci
xn ðxn Þo
½M
i
where
Ci ¼

ktr;i
kp

9.8 INSTANTANEOUS DISTRIBUTIONS IN FREE-RADICAL
ADDITION POLYMERIZATION
A growing polymer chain Px can either propagate, terminate, or transfer. The propagation
probability, q, is the probability that it will propagate rather than transfer or terminate and is
given by
q¼

Rate of propagation
Rate of porpagation þ Rate of transfer þ Rate of termination
q¼

kp ½M½P  
0

kp ½M½P   þ ktr ½R : H½P   þ 2kt ½P  2

ð9:38Þ

which becomes, with the aid of Equation 9.12,
q¼

kp ½M
0

kp ½M þ ktr ½R : H þ 2ðfkd kt ½IÞ1=2

ð9:39Þ

To get chain-length distributions from q, we must separately consider termination by
disproportionation and combination because the two mechanisms give rise to different
distributions. First, consider only those chains whose growth is terminated by either
disproportionation (kt ¼ ktd, j ¼ 2) or chain transfer. The resulting distributions are the
same, because a growing chain does not know if it has been killed by an encounter with
another growing chain or with a chain-transfer agent. Either way, its growth stops with no
change in length (that is not the case for combination). By taking the reciprocal of
Equation 9.39, we get
0

1
ktr ½R : H 2ðfkd ktd ½IÞ1=2
þ
¼1þ
kp ½M
q
kp ½M
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ {zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ }
1=xn for j ¼ 2ð10:35Þ

ð9:40Þ

Therefore,
xn ¼

q
ð1  qÞ

ð9:41Þ

Now, a polymer molecule containing x units, Px, has been formed by x  1 propagation
steps (the remaining unit was incorporated in the addition step), each with a probability q,

INSTANTANEOUS DISTRIBUTIONS IN FREE-RADICAL ADDITION POLYMERIZATION

161

and one disproportionation or transfer step with a probability 1  q. The probability of
finding such a molecule is equal to its number (mole) fraction; therefore,
nx
¼ ð1  qÞqðx1Þ
N

ð9:42Þ

which, lo and behold, is the “most probable” distribution (Eq. 8.3) again. But, although
Equations 9.42 and 8.3 appear the same, p and q are totally different quantities. In batch stepgrowth polymerization, p increases monotonically from 0 to 1 as the reaction proceeds. In
free-radical addition polymerization, however, q depends only indirectly on conversion,
since [I], [M], and [R0 :H] will, in general, vary with conversion. In the usual case, q is always
close to 1, as indeed it must be to form high molecular weight polymer chains.
Example 9.7 Show the structures represented by x ¼ 1 in Equation 9.42 for the polymerization of a vinyl monomer H2C¼CHX. Assume no chain transfer and initiation according to
I : I ! 2I 
Solution. Since chains here are killed only by disproportionation, dead chains of length
x ¼ 1 would be
H H
R–C–C–H
H X

and

H H
R–C=C
X

(With its double bond, the molecule on the right above could conceivably participate as a
comonomer in subsequent polymerization. The mechanism here, however, ignores that
possibility.)

This points out another important difference between the seemingly similar Equations 9.42
and 8.3. The distributions for free-radical addition include only terminated chains, not
unreacted monomer. In a step-growth reaction, there are no terminated chains short of
complete conversion, and x ¼ 1 in Equation 8.3 represents unreacted monomer.
Note that by analogy to Equation 8.6, xn for the most-probable distribution should be
xn ¼

1
1q

ð9:43Þ

which is greater by one than the value given by Equation 9.41. This discrepancy arises from
the fact that the kinetic derivation of Equation 9.41 neglects the monomer molecule added
to the chain in the addition step, while that molecule is specifically considered in the
derivation of Equation 9.42. From a practical standpoint, this makes little difference,
because in the usual free-radical addition polymerization, q ! 1 and xn xn 1.
By analogy to Equations 8.9–8.11 for step-growth polymerization:
wx
¼ xqðx1Þ ð1  qÞ2
W

ð9:44Þ

162

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

1þq
1q

ð9:45Þ

xw
¼1þq
xn

ð9:46Þ

xw ¼

Here, however, unlike the case in step growth, the approximations q ! 1 and xn  1, and
ln q q  1 are almost always applicable, and Equations 9.42, 9.44, and 9.46 simplify to
(recall Example 5.5)
nx
N

 
1
x
exp
xn
xn

ð9:47Þ

wx
W

 
1
x
exp
2
xn
xn

ð9:48Þ

xw
xn

ð9:49Þ

2

Now, let us consider chains that exclusively terminate by combination (kt ¼ ktc; j ¼ 1):
q¼

kp ½M
kp ½M þ 2ðfkd ktc ½IÞ1=2

ð9:50Þ

1
2ðfkd ktc ½IÞ1=2
¼1þ
kp ½M
q
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ {zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ }

ð9:51Þ

ð2=xn Þ for j ¼ 1

ð9:27bÞ

from which
xn ¼

2q
1q

ð9:52Þ

A dead chain consisting of x units is formed by the combination of two growing chains, one
containing y units and the other containing x  y units:
Py  þ PðxyÞ  ! Px

ð9:53Þ

One growing chain has undergone y  1 propagation steps, each of probability q. The other
chain has undergone x  y  1 propagation steps, each of probability q. Two growing
chains are terminated, each with a probability of 1  q. But, each dead chain consisting of x
total units could have been formed in x  1 different ways; for example,

163

INSTANTANEOUS DISTRIBUTIONS IN FREE-RADICAL ADDITION POLYMERIZATION

x Possible combinations of y and ðx  yÞ
2 1þ1
3 2 þ 1; 1 þ 2
4 3 þ 1; 2 þ 2; 1 þ 3
5 4 þ 1; 3 þ 2; 2 þ 3; 1 þ 4
and all possible ways to form a chain of x units total must be counted. Therefore,
nx
¼ ðx  1Þqðy1Þ qðxy1Þ ð1  qÞ2 ¼ ðx  1Þð1  qÞ2 qðx2Þ
N

ð9:54Þ

For this distribution,
xn ¼

2
1q

ð9:55Þ

which is greater by two than the value given by Equation 9.52, since the first monomer
incorporated in the addition step is now considered for each of the chains, and
2þq
1q

ð9:56Þ

xw 2 þ q
¼
xn
2

ð9:57Þ

xw ¼

For the usual free-radical case, where q ! 1, xn  1, and ln q

q  1:

nx
N



4x
2x
exp 
xn
x2n

ð9:58Þ

wx
W



4x2
2x
exp

xn
x3n

ð9:59Þ

xw
xn

ð9:60Þ

1:5

These distributions are plotted in reduced form in Figure 9.4. Note that termination by
combination sharpens the distributions because of the low probability of two very short or
two very long macroradicals combining.
As shown above, chains terminated by combination follow a different distribution than
those terminated by disproportionation or chain transfer. If a material contains chains
formed according to both distributions (as would happen, e.g., if a chain-transfer agent
were added to a system that terminates inherently by combination), the distributions must

164

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

FIGURE 9.4 Instantaneous number- and weight-fraction distributions of chain lengths in freeradical addition polymerization. Equations 9.47 and 9.48 are for termination by disproportionation
and/or chain transfer; Equations 9.58 and 9.59 are for termination by combination.

be summed according to the proportion (mole or mass fraction) of each, as detailed in
Kenat et al. [2] To solve this situation, let c be the mole (or number) fraction of the chains
that have been terminated by combination. The weight fraction of chains terminated by
combination is 2 c/(c þ 1). In terms of kinetic parameters, c is given by
c¼

2j
0

½j þ fktr ½R : H=kt fkd ½I1=2 g

ð9:61Þ

where j is defined by Equation 9.26. In terms of c, the general distributions become
 
 

 
nx
x
2 x
2
þ ð1 þ c Þ exp ðc þ 1Þ
ð9:62Þ
xn
¼ cðc þ 1Þ
N
xn
xn
xn

 
 

  
wx
x
x
x
þ ð1  c2 Þ
exp ðc þ 1Þ
¼ cðc þ 1Þ2
W
xn
xn
xn
xw =xn ¼

4c þ 2
ðc þ 1Þ2

ð9:63Þ

ð9:64Þ

For termination entirely disproportionation and/or chain transfer, c ¼ 0 and Equations 9.62–9.64 reduce to Equations 9.42–9.49; for termination exclusively by combina-

INSTANTANEOUS QUANTITIES

165

tion, c ¼ 1, they reduce to Equations 9.58–9.60, but these new equations are also able to
describe various degrees of mixed termination.
Example 9.8 Calculate q and xn for the styrene polymerization in Example 9.1 for
conditions at the start of the reaction. Neglect chain transfer. Styrene terminates by
combination at 60  C so that kt ¼ ktc (j ¼ 1). [M]o ¼ 8.72 mol/L.
Solution. Using the rate constants from Example 9.1 along with [M] ¼ [M]o and [I] ¼ [I]o
from above in Equation 9.39 gives q ¼ 0.9954. This illustrates the point made above that
q ! 1 right from the beginning of a typical free-radical addition polymerization.
Because termination is by combination, we use Equation 9.55 to get xn ¼ 434
(M n ¼ 45,200), so we are getting high molecular weight polymer right off the bat, too.
9.9

INSTANTANEOUS QUANTITIES

It is obvious from Equation 9.13 that the rate of polymerization is an instantaneous
quantity; it depends on the particular values of [M], [I], and T (through the temperature
dependence of the rate constants) that exist as a particular instant (and location, for that
matter) in a reactor. In a uniform, isothermal batch reaction (Example 9.1), the rate of
polymerization decreases monotonically because of the decreases in both [M] and [I] with
time. In a similar fashion, xn according to Equation 9.35 is a function of [M], [I], T, and
[R0 :H], all of which may vary with time (and/or location) in a reactor. But is the concept of
an instantaneous xn valid? How much do these quantities change during the lifetimes of
individual chains? This important point is clarified in the following example.
Example 9.9 Consider the uniform, isothermal batch polymerization of Example 9.1. For
conditions at the start of the reaction, calculate:
(a) the average lifetime of a growing chain, t, and compare it with the half lives of
monomer and initiator,
(b) the percent decrease in initiator concentration during the time interval t,
(c) the conversion during the time interval t, and
(d) the number of growing polymer chains per liter of reaction mass.
Additional necessary data: kp ¼ 176 L/mol. s
Solution. (a) This is always conceptually difficult. Think of it as calculating the time
required for a car traveling at a constant velocity to cover a specified distance. Here, the
distance corresponds to the kinetic chain length, n (Eq. 9.22), the average number of
monomer units added to a chain during its lifetime (note that the mode of termination is
immaterial). The velocity corresponds to the rate at which the monomer is added to a single
chain. Monomer is added to all chains (in a unit volume of reaction mass) at a rate rp. In that
unit volume of reaction mass, there are [P] growing chains. Therefore, the rate of
monomer addition to a single chain ¼ rp/[P] and
t¼

v½P  
rp

166

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

With Equations 9.12, 9.13, and 9.22, this becomes
t¼

1
2ðfkd kt ½IÞ1=2

Inserting the given rate constants and [I] ¼ [I]o ¼ 0.05 mol/L gives t ¼ 0.141 s (!). From
Figure 9.1, the time to reach 50% conversion (monomer half life) is about 8 h. From
equation 9.16b, the time to reach (I/Io) ¼ 0.5 is (ln 0.5)/kd or 20 h.
(b) We can confidently neglect any volume change over the extremely short average
chain lifetime so thatðI=I0 Þ ¼ ð½I=½I0 Þ ¼ expðkd tÞð10:16bÞ:
With t ¼ 0:141 =s



½I
¼ 1:35  104
% decrease in ½I  ¼ 100 1 
½I0

(c) The results of (b) justifies the use of Equation 9.15. With t ¼ 0.141/ s, X ¼ 3.36
 106 of 3.36  104%.
(d) From equation 9.12, we get [P] ¼ 1.35  107 mol growing chains/L. Or, multiplying by Avogadro’s number, 6.02  1023 growing chains/mol growing chains, it is
8.14  1016 growing chains L.

Some important conclusions can be drawn from the preceding example. In a typical,
homogeneous, free-radical addition polymerization, there are lots of chains growing at any
instant. The average lifetime of a growing chain, however, is extremely short, many orders
of magnitude smaller than the half-lives of either monomer or initiator. Once a chain has
been initiated by the decomposition of an initiator molecule (recall that this is the slow
step), it grows and dies in a flash, and once terminated, it plays no further role in the
reaction (unless it happens to act as a chain-transfer agent, as in Example 9.6) and merely
sits around inertly as more chains are formed. This is to be contrasted with step-growth
polymerization, in which the chains always maintain their terminal reactivity and continue
to grow throughout the reaction (see Table 9.1).
The lifetime of free-radical chains is, in fact, so short that changes in concentrations are
entirely negligible during a chain lifetime. Hence, it is perfectly proper to characterize
chains formed at any instant when [M], [I], T, and [R0 :H] have a particular set of values. All
the quantities defined to this point (xn , xw , q) and, therefore, the distributions are just such
instantaneous quantities. For this reason, it was necessary to specify conditions “at the start
of the reaction” in earlier examples to permit their calculations.
9.10

CUMULATIVE QUANTITIES

Unfortunately (for the sake of simplicity), as conditions vary within a polymerization
reactor, so do the instantaneous quantities, making it very difficult to accurately determine
xn and xw as functions of time. The polymer in the reactor is a mixture of material formed
under varying conditions of temperature and concentrations, and therefore must be
characterized by cumulative quantities, which are integrated averages of the instantaneous
quantities of the material formed up until the reactor is sampled. The cumulative number-

167

CUMULATIVE QUANTITIES

TABLE 9.1 Comparison of Step-Growth (Chapter 8) and Addition (Chapter 9)
Polymerizations
Characteristic
Typical monomer
structure
Reactor contents
during
polymerization at
50% conversion
Reaction speed
(kinetics)

Initiator required
Effect of
temperature
Networks and gels

Step-Growth Polymerization

Addition Polymerization

Bifunctional monomers with two
organic functional groups
(amines, alcohols, acids, etc.)
p ¼ .5; 50% of functional groups
reacted, xn ¼ 2. Only small
chains present.

Monomers have a polymerizable
double bond (such as in vinyl
or acrylate monomers)
X ¼ 0.5; large polymer chains and
monomer are in the reactor, xn
depends on initiator
concentration
Generally fast; solution contains
primarily monomers until high
conversions are reached, so the
solution retains relatively low
viscosity
Usually
Arrhenius behavior

Generally slow; depends on
reactivity of functional groups;
dimers, trimers, etc., start to
form from the start, making the
solution syrupy and viscous.
No
Arrhenius behavior
Requires tri- (or higher)
functional monomers (A3) and
high enough conversions to
exceed the critical gelation
point.

Multiple polymerizable double
bonds on a monomer result in
network structures; a gel starts
to form as soon as reaction
propagates (even at low
conversion)

average chain length, <xn >, is simply the total moles of monomer polymerized over the
total moles of dead chains formed. In a batch reactor, for example,
Moles of monomer in dead chains ¼ M0  MðtÞ ¼ M0 XðtÞ
Moles of dead chains formed ¼ f jfI0  IðtÞg þ fR0 : H0  R0 : HðtÞg
(For termination by disproportionation, each successful initiator reaction results in two
dead chains, and for combination, one; hence, the need for j. Each reacted molecule of
chain-transfer agent results in one dead chain.) Therefore,
< xn > ðtÞ ¼

M0 XðtÞ
0
0
f jfI0  IðtÞg þ fR : H0  R : HðtÞg

ð9:65Þ

(If you wish to neglect volume change, all the molar quantities can be enclosed in square
brackets to give concentrations.) Note that the preceding expression is indeterminate at
t ¼ 0. At this point, however, xn ¼ <xn > ¼ 1 (just monomers), both are given by
Equation 9.35.
A good analogy for visualizing the relation between xn and <xn > is the “well-stirred,
adiabatic bathtub.” xn corresponds to the temperature of the water leaving the tap, and
<xn > to the temperature of the water in the tub. So, the newly formed polymer entering
from the top must be averaged with all that is been made earlier (the stuff already in the
bathtub). As long as the tub is not full, the analogy applies to a batch reactor. If the tub is
allowed to fill and overflow, it applies to a continuous stirred-tank reactor as well.

168

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

Example 9.10 For the reaction in Examples 9.1 and 9.9, calculate and plot xn and <xn >
versus X.
Solution. For this homogeneous, isothermal, batch reaction, X is given as a function of time
by Equations 9.19 (incorporating volume change) or 9.20 (neglecting volume change) as
illustrated in Example 9.1. I(t) is given by Equation 9.16b. By combining Equations 9.27,
9.14, 9.16b, 9.6, and 9.17 we get
xn ðtÞ ¼

kp ½M0 f1  XðtÞg
jðfkd kt Þ

1=2

ð9:270 Þ

1=2
½I0 f1 þ «XðtÞg1=2 expðkd t=2Þ

Had it been necessary to include chain transfer, we would have used Equation 9.35 with
[R0 :H] related to [M] with Equation 9.37. Similar treatment of Equation 9.65 gives
< xn > ðtÞ ¼

½M0 XðtÞ
f j½I0 f1  expðkd tÞg

ð9:650 Þ

Calculations are facilitated by selecting time as the independent variable and relating X, xn ,
and <xn > to t through Equations 9.19 or 9.20, 9.270 and 9.650 .
Alternatively, X may be chosen as the independent variable and Equation 9.19 or 9.20
solved for the corresponding times, which are then used in Equations 9.270 and 9.650 . The
results are shown in Figure 9.5. Note that in this case, xn goes through a minimum at high
conversions. In fact, it ultimately goes to infinity, because in this example of “dead-stop”
polymerization, [I] goes to zero while [M] remains finite. Not so obvious on this scale is the
fact that <xn > must also go through a minimum. As long as xn is less than <xn >, the
former will continue to drag the latter down (adding colder water from the tap cools off
the water in the tub). When xn is greater, it must pull <xn > up (you warm up the water in
the tub by adding hotter water from the tap). Therefore, there must be a minimum in <xn >

500

Number-average chain length

450
400
350

<x–n>

300
250
200

x–n

<x–n>

150
100
50

x–n

0
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.98
Conversion, X

0.99

Xmax

1.00

FIGURE 9.5 Instantaneous and cumulative number-average chain lengths versus conversion for an
isothermal, free-radical, batch polymerization (data of Example 9.10).

RELATIONS BETWEEN INSTANTANEOUS AND CUMULATIVE AVERAGE CHAIN LENGTHS

169

where the two curves cross, although <xn > does reach a finite value of 173.5 at the
maximum conversion of 99.48%. (The numbers quoted apply for j ¼ 0.136. For j ¼ 0,
they are 173.2 and 99.30%.) Even though the last tiny drop from the tap may be very hot, it
is not going to significantly raise the temperature of the 50 gallons already in the tub.

It is instructive to compare the results of Example 9.10 with Equation 8.6 for step-growth
polymerization. There, xn increases monotonically with conversion (p), and high conversions are necessary for high chain lengths. This is not true for free-radical addition, where
chains formed early in the reaction have fully developed chain lengths.
Also keep in mind that if samples are removed from the reactor and analyzed for
number-average chain length, the quantity determined is <xn >. The cumulative quantity is
what characterizes the reactor contents. The only way to measure xn would be to sample at
a very low conversion, where xn <xn >.
9.11 RELATIONS BETWEEN INSTANTANEOUS AND CUMULATIVE
AVERAGE CHAIN LENGTHS FOR A BATCH REACTOR
Given any instantaneous or cumulative average chain length as a function of conversion in
a batch reactor, the others may be calculated as follows. Recall that conversion is defined as
X

M0  M
M0

ð9:14Þ

The moles of monomer polymerized up to conversion X is
M0 ¼ M ¼ M0 X
while the moles of monomer polymerized in a conversion increment dX is
dM ¼ M0 dX
The moles of polymer chains formed in the conversion increment dX is:
dN ¼

dM M0 dX
¼
xn
xn

The total moles of polymer chains formed up to conversion X is obtained by integrating dN:
N¼

ðx

dN ¼

ðx

0

M0 dX
0 xn

But, by definition of <xn >, N is also given by
N¼

moles monomer polymerized to conversion X
M0 X
¼
< xn >
< xn >

170

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

Equating the two expressions for N gives
X
ðdX=x
nÞ
0

< xn >¼ Ð x

ð9:66Þ

Differentiating Equation 10.66 reverses the result:

xn ¼

dX
dðX= < xn >Þ

ð9:67Þ

Equation 5.6 gives the weight average of a mixture in terms of a summation of the
weight averages of the finite components of the mixture. For a mixture of differential
components of weight-average chain length xw , this may be generalized to
Ðx
ð
xw dWp
1 x
< xw >¼ 0Ð x
¼
xw dWp
Wp 0
0 dWp
where
dWp ¼ weight of polymer formed in conversion increment of dX and
Wp ¼ total weight of polymer formed up to conversion X.
Now Wp ¼ WoX and dWp ¼ WodX, where Wo is the weight of monomer fed; so
ð
1 x
xw dX
< xw >¼
X 0

ð9:68Þ

and by differentiating Equation 9.68, we get


d < xw >
xw ¼< xw > þX
dX

ð9:69Þ

The relation between xn and xw is, of course, determined on a microscopic scale by the
nature of the instantaneous distribution, which fixes the instantaneous polydispersity index,
xw /xn , given by Equation 9.64. However, it is not the instantaneous polydispersity index
that characterizes the reactor product but rather the cumulative polydispersity index
<xw >/<xn >. Even though the instantaneous polydispersity index may remain constant,
if the instantaneous averages vary during the reaction (as in Example 9.10), the cumulative
distribution must be broader than the instantaneous, increasing the cumulative polydispersity index (Example 5.2 provides a simple quantitative illustration of this). This is one of
the reasons why commercial polymers often have polydispersity indices much greater than
the minimum value given by Equation 9.64.

RELATIONS BETWEEN INSTANTANEOUS AND CUMULATIVE AVERAGE CHAIN LENGTHS

171

The “road map” below summarizes how to get between the various averages when one is
known as a function of conversion:
(9.66)

x–n(X)

x–n (X)
(9.67)

(9.64)

x–w(X)

(9.68)

x–w (X)
(9.69)

Remember that <xn > and <xw > can be experimentally determined by sampling the
reactor, but xn and xw can be obtained only by calculation at finite conversions.
Example 9.11 Which type of isothermal reactor would produce the narrowest possible
distribution of chain lengths in a free-radical addition polymerization: continuous stirred
tank reactor (CSTR, or backmix), batch (assume perfect stirring in each of the previous),
plug-flow tubular, or laminar-flow tubular?
Solution. A CSTR has a large well-mixed tank with continuous inlet of reactant and outlet
of product (polymer). In an ideal continuous stirred tank reactor, [M] and [I] in the tank are
constant, and therefore xn is too. This will give the narrowest possible distribution, due only
to the microscopically random nature of the reaction. With an ideal CSTR, <xw >/<xn >
¼ xw /xn . In a batch reactor, [M] and [I] decrease as the polymers are produced. In both of
the tubular reactors, where the reaction occurs as the reactants flow through a tube, the [M]
decreases as the reacting mixture moves from the inlet to the exit. In each of the latter three
reactors, xn changes with conversion, broadening the distribution so that {<xw >/<xn >}
> xw /xn . Note that changes in temperature (which are not uncommon for exothermic
polymerizations) can cause the rate constants to vary, and thus also contribute to
broadening of the distribution.
Example 9.12 Consider the isothermal, free-radical batch polymerization of a monomer with
[M]o ¼ 1.6901 gmol/L and [I]o ¼ 1.6901  103 gmol/L. At the reaction temperature,
kp2 =kt ¼ 26:1 L=mol=s and kd ¼ 4.369  107/s1. This particular polymer terminates by
disproportionation (j ¼ 2). Neglect chain transfer. Assume perfect reactor stirring and f ¼ 1.
Because this reaction is carried out in a rather dilute solution, volume change is negligible.
Calculate and plot xn , <xn >, xw , <xw >, and <xw >/<xn > versus conversion for this system.
Hint: For this particular system, ðkp2 =kt Þ is very large and kd is small (compare with
Example 9.1). This has some important consequences. First, the chain lengths will be
tremendous. (Although this example is based on a real system, in real life it is likely that
chain lengths would be transfer limited, that is, the chains would transfer to something in
the reaction mass before reaching the lengths calculated.) Second, [I] remains essentially
constant throughout the course of the reaction. As a result, xn is linear with X (combine
Equations 9.27a and 9.14 to see why). This, in turn, allows easy analytical evaluation of
Equations 9.66–9.69, but also renders Equation 9.65 useless.

172

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

Solution. Following the suggestion in the hint yields
xn ¼

kp ½M0
jðfkd kt Þ1=2 ½I1=2

ð1  XÞ ¼ 158900ð1  XÞ

Plugging this relation into Equation 9.66 gives
158900X
158900X
¼
lnð1
 XÞ
½dX=ð1

XÞ
0

< xn >¼ Ð x

Now, for j ¼ 2 and c ¼ 0, Equation 9.64 or 9.49 gives xw ¼ 2xn , so that
xw ¼ 3178000ð1  XÞ
When this relation is plugged into Equation 9.68, we get

< xw >¼



ð
ð
1 x
317800 x
X
xw dX ¼
ð1  XÞdX ¼ 317800 1 
X 0
X
2
0

Plots based on these equations are shown in Figure 9.6. Note that at high conversions,
the polydispersity index begins to shoot up well above the minimum (instantaneous) value
of 2.0.

FIGURE 9.6 Instantaneous and cumulative number- and weight-average chain lengths and the
cumulative polydispersity index for an isothermal, free-radical, batch polymerization
(Example 9.12).

EMULSION POLYMERIZATION

173

If it is necessary to maintain minimum polydispersity (albeit with shorter chains), the drift
in instantaneous chain length can often be compensated for by varying the rate of addition
of chain-transfer agent to the reactor. In Example 9.12, a high initial rate of a very active
agent could be reduced as conversion increased, thereby counteracting the decrease in xn
(and increase in polydispersity) that would otherwise occur. Adjusting the rate of addition
of chain-transfer agent to maintain xn constant has been discussed for batch [3] and
continuous [2] reactors.
Example 9.12 constitutes one of the simplest possible illustrations of what is sometimes
termed “polymer reaction engineering.” Even a minor complication, such as substitution of
the parameters of Example 9.1 or the inclusion of chain transfer would necessitate a
numerical solution. While the basic principles are there, additional detail is beyond the
scope of this chapter, but you might wish to consider the application of these principles to a
nonisothermal reactor, etc.

9.12

EMULSION POLYMERIZATION

The preceding discussion of free-radical addition polymerization has considered only
homogeneous reactions. Considerable polymer is produced commercially by a complex
heterogeneous free-radical addition process known as emulsion polymerization. This
process was developed in the United States during World War II to manufacture synthetic
rubber. A rational explanation of the mechanism of emulsion polymerization was proposed
by Harkins [4] and quantified by Smith and Ewart [5] after the war, when information
gathered at various locations could be freely exchanged. Perhaps the best way to introduce
the subject is to list the feed sent to a typical reactor.
Typical Emulsion Polymerization Feed
100 parts (by weight) monomer (water insoluble)
180 parts water
2–5 parts fatty acid surfactant (emulsifying agent)
0.1–0.5 part water-soluble initiator
0–1 part chain-transfer agent (monomer soluble)
The surfactant is the critical ingredient that helps to form an emulsion where the monomer
is dispersed in droplets. Surfactants are generally the sodium or potassium salts of organic
acids or sulfates that have alkane-based R groups:
O
[R–C–O]- Na +

O
[R–O–S–O]- Na +
O

When they are added to water in low concentrations, they ionize and float around freely
much as sodium chloride ions would. The anions, however, consist of a highly polar
hydrophilic (water-seeking) “head” (COO or SO3) and an organic, hydrophobic (waterfearing) “tail” (R). As the surfactant concentration is increased, a value is suddenly reached

174

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

FIGURE 9.7

Variation of solution properties to define the CMC.

where the anions begin to agglomerate in micelles rather than float around individually.
These micelles have dimensions on the order of 5–6 nm, far too small to be seen with a light
microscope (although a successful emulsion of micelles will turn a solution cloudy, as a
bottle of oil and vinegar salad dressing would look after shaking). The micelles consist of a
tangle of the hydrophobic tails in the interior (getting as far away from the water as
possible) with the hydrophilic heads on the outside. This process is easily observed by
following the variation of a number of solution properties with surfactant concentration, for
example, electrical conductivity or surface tension (see Figure 9.7). The break in the slope
occurs when micelles start to form with higher concentrations of surfactant, and is known
as the critical micelle concentration or CMC.
When an organic monomer is added to an aqueous micelle solution, it naturally prefers
the organic environment within the micelles. Some of it congregates there, swelling the
micelles until equilibrium is reached with the contraction force of surface tension. Most of
the monomer, however, is distributed in the form of much larger (1 mm or 1000 nm) droplets
stabilized by surfactant. This complex mixture is an emulsion. The cleaning action of
surfactants is why they are widely used in soaps and detergents, where they emulsify oils
and greases.
Despite the fact that most of the monomer is present in the droplets, the swollen
micelles, because of their much smaller size, present a much larger surface area than the
droplets. This is easily seen by assuming a micelle volume to drop volume ratio of 1/10 and
using the ballpark figures given above. Since the surface/volume ratio of a sphere is 3/R,
Smicelle
¼
Sdroplet



Vmic:
Vdrop:



Rdrop:
Rmic:



1
10



1000
¼ 20
5

Figure 9.8 illustrates the structures present during emulsion polymerization.
Free-radicals for classical emulsion polymerizations are generated in the aqueous phase
by the decomposition of water-soluble initiators, usually potassium or ammonium persulfate:
! 2  SO4 
S2 O2
8
Persulfate
Sulfate ion radical

EMULSION POLYMERIZATION

FIGURE 9.8

175

Structures in emulsion polymerization.

Redox systems, so called because they involve the alternate oxidation and reduction of a
trace catalyst, are one of the alternatives for generating free-radicals in the initiation step.
For example,

2

1: S2 O2
8 þ HSO3 ! SO4 þ SO4  þ HSO3 

Persulfate Bisulfite
2þ
3þ
2: S2 O2
! SO2
þ  SO4 
8 þ Fe
4 þ Fe
3þ
3: HSO
! HSO3  þ Fe2þ
3 þ Fe

2

Net S2 O2
8 þ HSO3 ! SO4 þ SO4  þ HSO3 

The original wartime GR-S, poly(butadiene-co-styrene), polymerization was carried out at
50  C using potassium persulfate initiator (“hot” rubber). The use of the more efficient
redox systems allowed a reduction in polymerization temperature to 5  C (“cold” rubber).
The latter has superior properties because the lower polymerization temperature promotes
cis-1-4-addition of the butadiene.
The radicals thus generated in the aqueous phase bounce around until they encounter
some monomer. Since the surface area presented by the monomer-swollen micelles is so
much greater than that of the droplets, the probability of a radical entering a monomerswollen micelle rather than a droplet is large. As soon as the radical encounters the
monomer within the micelle, it initiates polymerization. The conversion of monomer to
polymer within the growing micelle lowers the monomer concentration therein, and
monomer begins to diffuse from uninitiated micelles and monomer droplets to the growing,
polymer-containing micelles. Those monomer-swollen micelles not struck by a radical

176

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

during the early stages of conversion thus disappear, losing their monomer and surfactant to
those that have been initiated. This first phase of the reaction was termed Stage I by Smith
and Ewart. The reaction mass now consists of a stable number of growing polymer particles
(originally micelles) and the monomer droplets, termed Stage II.
In Stage II, the monomer droplets simply act as reservoirs supplying monomer to the
growing polymer particles by diffusion through the water. The monomer concentration in
the growing particles maintains a nearly constant dynamic equilibrium value dictated by
the tendency toward further dilution (increasing the entropy) and the opposing effect of
surface tension attempting to minimize the surface area. Although most organic monomers
are normally thought of as being water “insoluble,” their concentrations in the aqueous
phase, though small, are sufficient to permit a high enough diffusion flux to maintain the
monomer concentration in the polymerizing particles [6]. Smith and Ewart then subdivided
1
/2
Stage II into three subcases where the ratio of growing free-radicals per particle is
1
1
(case 1), ¼ /2 (case 2), or  /2 (case 3). The description that follows applies to their case 2
that often happens in practice.
A monomer-swollen micelle that has been struck by a radical contains one growing
chain. With only one radical per particle, the chain cannot terminate by disproportionation
or by combination, and it continues to grow until a second initiator radical enters the
particle. Under conditions prevailing within the particle in case 2 (tiny particles and highly
reactive radicals), the rate of termination is much greater than the rate of propagation, so the
chain growth is terminated essentially immediately after the entrance of the second initiator
radical [6]. The particle then remains dormant until a third initiator radical enters, initiating
the growth of a second chain. This second chain grows until it is terminated by the entry of
the fourth radical, and so on.
9.13

KINETICS OF EMULSION POLYMERIZATION IN STAGE II, CASE 2

Thus, in Stage II, the reaction mass consists of a stable number of monomer-swollen
polymer particles that are the loci of all polymerizations. At any given time (for case 2), a
particle contains either one growing chain or no growing chains (assumed to be equally
probably). Statistically, then, if there are N particles per liter of reaction mass, there are N/2
growing chains per liter of reaction mass.
The polymerization rate is given, as before, by
rp ¼ kp ½M½P  

ð9:7Þ

where kp is the usual homogeneous propagation rate constant for polymerization within the
particles and [M] is the equilibrium monomer concentration within a particle. Now,
½P   ¼

N
moles radical=liter of raction mass
2A

ð9:70Þ

where A is Avogadro’s number (6.02  1023 radicals/mol radicals). The rate of polymerization is then
rp ¼ kp

N
½M 
2A

ð9:71Þ

KINETICS OF EMULSION POLYMERIZATION IN STAGE II, CASE 2

177

where typical units for the various terms are as follows:

kp ½¼ 

moles monomer
liter of particles; s
moles monomer moles monomer

liter of particles liter of particles
N
moles radicals
½¼
2A
liter of reaction mass
moles monomer
½M ½¼
liter of particles
moles of monomer
rp ½¼
liter of reaction mass; s

Equation 9.73 thus gives the rate of polymerization per total volume of reaction mass.
Surprisingly, it predicts the rate to be independent of initiator concentration. Moreover,
since both N and [M] are constant in Stage II, a constant rate is predicted. This is borne out
experimentally, as shown in Figure 9.9 [4]. Deviations from linearity are observed at low
100
90
0.10 m
2.31%

80
0.5 m
10.5%
70

Conversion (%)

0.04 m
0.94%

0.01 m
0.24%

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

10

20

30
40
Time (h)

50

60

FIGURE 9.9 The emulsion polymerization of isoprene as a function of surfactant (potassium
laureate) concentration—from low (0.01 molar) and slow to high (0.5 molar) and fast. Reprinted from
Harkins [4]. Copyright 1947 by the American Chemical Society. Reprinted by permission of the
copyright owner.

178

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

conversions as N is being stabilized in Stage I, and at high conversions in Stage III, when
the monomer droplets are used up and are no longer able to supply the monomer necessary
to maintain [M] constant within the growing polymer particles. Thus, in Stage III, the rate
drops off as the monomer is exhausted within the particles.
Note that the rate increases with surfactant (emulsifier) concentration! The more
surfactant used, the more micelles are established in Stage I, and the higher N will be in
Stage II. The predicted independence of rate on initiator concentration must be viewed with
caution. It is valid as long as N is held constant, but in practice, N increases with [I]o. The more
initiator added at the start of a reaction, the greater the number of monomer-swollen micelles
that start growing before N is stabilized. Methods are available for estimating N [6–8].
Example 9.13 The Putrid Paint Division of Crud Chemicals, Inc., has a latex available that is
10% (by weight) poly(vinyl acetate) and contains 1  1014 particles/cm3. To obtain optimum
characteristics as an interior wall paint, a larger particle size and higher concentration of
polymer are needed. It is proposed to obtain these by adding an additional four parts (by
weight) of monomer per part of polymer to the latex and polymerizing without further
addition of emulsifier. The reaction will be carried to 85% conversion, and the unreacted
monomer will be steam-stripped and recovered. (The conditions of this “seeded” polymerization are set up so that the entire reaction proceeds in Stage II.) Estimate the time required for
the reaction and the rate of heat removal (in Btu/gal of original latex, per hour) necessary to
maintain an essentially isothermal reaction at 60  C. At what conversion would the monomer
droplets disappear and the rate cease to be constant?
Data : kp ¼ 3700 L=mol=s at 60  C
DHp ¼ 21 kcal=mol monomer unit
rðpolymerÞ ¼ 1:2 g=cm3
rðmonomerÞ ¼ 0:8 g=cm3
MðmonomerÞ ¼ Mr ¼ 86 g=mol
The concentration of monomer in the growing polymer particles is 10% (by weight).
Solution. It must first be assumed that in the absence of additional emulsifier, no new
micelles will be established, so the original latex particles act as the exclusive loci for
further polymerization. Then, [M] and N must be obtained for use in Equation 9.71.
By assuming additivity of monomer and polymer volumes in the latex particles, we get
½M ¼ 1:33 mol monomer=L of particles
Since N ¼ 1  1017 particles/L of original latex,
N
¼ 8:31  108 mol free radicals=L of original latex
2A
and Equation 9.71 gives
rp ¼ 4:09  104 mole monomer=L of original latex=s
¼ 1:47 mole monomer=L of original latex=h

KINETICS OF EMULSION POLYMERIZATION IN STAGE II, CASE 2

179

By again assuming additivity of water and polymer volumes, the density of the original
latex is found to be 1.02 g/cm3. One liter of the original latex therefore has a mass of 1020 g
and contains 102 g of polymer, to which 102  4 ¼ 408 g or 4.74 mol of monomer are
added. The reaction converts 4.74  0.85 ¼ 4.02 mol of monomer, which takes
4:02 mol monomer
liter of original latex; h

¼ 2:27 h
liter of original latex
1:48 mol monomer
For an isothermal reaction, the rate of heat removal must be the same as the rate of heat
generation by the exothermic reaction, and is the product of DHp and rp, or 31,000 cal/L of
original latex/h or 467 Btu/gal original latex/h.
When the monomer droplets just disappear, the reaction enters Stage III, and all the
monomer and polymer will be in the swollen polymer particles, a total of 102 g (original
polymer) þ 408 g (added monomer) ¼ 510 g/L of original latex. At this point, the particles
still contain 10% monomer, so there are (0.1)  510 g ¼ 51 g of unconverted monomer.
Therefore,
X ¼1



M
51
¼1
¼ 0:875 or 87:5%
M0
408

Beyond this point, the rate will drop off as the monomer concentration in the particles falls.

Despite the secondary effect of [I]o on the rate, it has a strong influence on the average chain
length. The greater the rate of radical generation, the greater will be the frequency of
alternation between chain growth and termination in a particle, resulting in a lower chain
length. If rc represents the rate of radical capture/L of reaction mass (half of which produces
dead chains), in the absence of chain transfer:
xn ¼

kp ðN=2AÞ½M kp N½M
¼
ðrc =2Þ
Arc

ð9:72Þ

The rate of generation of radicals is based on the presence of initiator in the aqueous
phase alone:

rgen

mol radicals
liter of aq: phase; s





mol initiator
¼ 2kd =s½I 
liter of aq: phase


ð9:73Þ

If a steady-state radical concentration is assumed,

rc






mol radicals
mol radicals
liter of aq: phase
¼ rgen
 a
liter of reac: mass; s
liter of aq: phase; s
liter of reaction mass
ð9:74Þ

where a is the volume fraction aqueous phase. Thus,
0

rc ¼ 2kd ½Ia ¼ 2kd ½I 

ð9:75Þ

180

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

where [I0 ] ¼ [I] a, the moles of initiator per total volume of the reaction mass and
xn ¼

kp N½M
2Akd ½I 0 

ð9:76Þ

The chain length is, therefore, inversely proportional to the first power of initiator
concentration (compare with the second-order behavior for homogeneous polymerizations
in Eq. 9.27).
It must be emphasized that the preceding is a simplified view of an extremely complex
process. Even within Stage II, Smith and Ewart pointed out that their case 2 was merely the
middle of a spectrum. At one end of the spectrum, case 1, the average number of radicals
per particle is much less than 1/2. This is believed to occur sometimes because of radical
escape from the particles. At the other extreme, the average number of radicals per particle
is much greater than 1/2. This comes about from large particles and/or small kt, both of
which slow termination. Under these conditions, each particle acts as a tiny homogeneous
reactor, according to the kinetics and the mechanism previously developed for homogeneous free-radical addition. The transition from case 2 to case 3 kinetics is often observed
in seeded emulsion polymerizations, where the particles are fairly large to begin with and
grow from there as the reaction proceeds.
The Smith–Ewart theory was developed for monomers such as styrene, with very low
water solubility. Monomers such as acrylonitrile, with appreciable water solubility (on the
order of 10%), may undergo significant homogeneous initiation in the aqueous phase. In
some emulsion systems, the particles flocculate (coalesce) during polymerization, not only
making a kinetic description difficult, but also sometimes badly fouling reactors. Good
reviews of this subject are available [8–11], as well as complete books [7,12–15].
9.14

SUMMARY

Addition polymerizations are industrially important, and the basics of these reactions have
been introduced in a generalized sense that is applicable to most monomers with a
polymerizable double bond (including vinyl and acrylic monomers). Free-radical polymerizations proceed by a three-step mechanism (initiation, propagation, and termination).
Some of the important characteristics of addition polymerization are contrasted with stepgrowth polymerization in Table 9.1, as well as the cartoon shown in Figure 9.1. It is difficult
to have a direct comparison of the two reaction mechanisms, since some terms (such as
critical gelation point) are only relevant in one case. A great resource for the kinetics of
free-radical and many other types of polymerization are covered in Reference 16. In the
next chapters, specialized polymerizations as well as the design of polymerization
processes used in the industry are described.
PROBLEMS
1

Pure styrene undergoes significant thermal polymerization without any added initiator
above about 100  C. A mechanism has been postulated to explain thermal polymerization which involves a reaction between two monomer molecules to form diradicals
that initiate chain growth from each end.

PROBLEMS

H H
H H
C=C + C=C
H
H

•

181

H H H H
C–C–C–C•
H H

(a)

Assume that the above reaction is rate controlling and derive an expression for
the rate of polymerization according to this mechanism.
(b) Styrene terminates by disproportionation at these temperatures. Obtain an
expression for xn according to this mechanism. Neglect chain transfer.
(c) Interpret your answer to part (b) in terms of the relation between xn , <xn >, and
their variation with conversion in an isothermal batch reactor.
(d) What do you think the distribution of chain lengths would be for this mechanism?
2

In a free-radical polymerization, 1 mol of acrylic acid monomer CH2¼C(H)(COOH)
is placed in a reactor with 0.001 mol of hydrogen peroxide.
In this problem, ignore volume shrinkage during polymerization and assume no
chain transfer (no loss of radicals to anything except another monomer once a chain
reaction has begun).
(a) How much monomer remains at 75% conversion?
(b) If the initiator efficiency is 0.37, what is the average chain length in the reactor,
including the remaining monomer (xn )?
(c) After the monomer is removed (by evaporation under vacuum), what is the
average chain length of PAA?
(d) What is the number-average molecular weight of the PAA in part (c)?
(e) How would you determine the polydispersity of PAA in part (c)?

3

Consider a free-radical addition reaction in which there is negligible conventional
termination. Instead, growing chains are killed by a degradative chain-transfer reaction:
kt

0

Px  þ D!Px þ D

where D0 is a stable radical that does not reinitiate polymerization.
(a) Obtain the rate expression for this mechanism.
(b) Obtain the expression for number-average chain length according to this
mechanism.
4

Crud Chemicals has been carrying out an isothermal batch polymerization of styrene
exactly like the one treated in Examples 9.1 and 9.9. One day, however, they get a little
impatient and decide to “kick” the reaction by adding a second charge of initiator,
identical to the first, at 50% conversion (t ¼ 8.36 h) (this is actually a fairly common
practice in industry). To help them understand the effects of this,
(a) calculate the ratio of xn just after the kick to xn just before the kick and
(b) resketch Figure 9.4 qualitatively for this process.

5

Consider the isothermal batch polymerization of styrene treated in Examples 9.1
and 9.9. Now uppose that a chain-transfer agent with C ¼ 1.0 is added to the initial
charge at a concentration of [R:H]o ¼ 0.01 mol/L.

182

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

Recalculate xn (t ! 1) and <xn >(t ! 1) for this batch. You may neglect
volume change.
6

A chain-transfer agent is included in a homogeneous, batch free-radical polymerization. What fraction of the initial amount of chain-transfer agent remains at 99%
conversion for C ¼ 0.1, 1.0, and 10?

7

The classical kinetic scheme for free-radical addition polymerization neglects one other
possible form of termination, primary-radical termination (PRT), in which a growing
chain is killed by reaction with a free-radical R from initiator decomposition:
For the polymerization of styrene at 60  C in Examples 9.1, 9.9, and 9.10, estimate:
(a) the concentration of primary radicals [I] at X ¼ 0 and
(b) the ratio of rates of regular termination (rt) to primary-radical termination (rprt)
at X ¼ 0.
Altough we do not know the rate constants ka and kprt, because of the similarity of the
species involved, let us assume (at least as an order-of-magnitude approximation) that
ka

8

kp

and

kprt

kt

Equations 9.30 and 9.31 give the temperature dependence of rate- and numberaverage chain length for a homogeneous free-radical polymerization. Obtain the
analogous expressions for classical Stage II, case 2 emulsion polymerization. Use the
following ballpark figures to calculate rp(70  C)/rp(60  C) and xn (70  C)/xn (60  C) for
the emulsion polymerization:
Ep

6 kcal=mol

Ed

30 kcal=mol

Et

2 kcal=mol

9

For the experiment describing the temperature-dependence of chain length discussed
in Example 9.3,
(a) determine the temperature required to run the free-radical polymerization to
obtain a polymer with double the molecular weight of the polymer produced at
60  C and
(b) for the reaction temperature in a, find the rate of this reaction compared to 60  C.

10

An initial experiment at an eyeglass manufacturer has produced poly(methyl methacrylate), whose monomer is CH2¼C(CH3)(COOCH3) (used in eyeglasses and hard
contact lenses), with a number-average molecular weight of 143,000, by carrying out
the reaction at 65  C for 45 min. Since the product design group has determined that a
molecular weight of 100,000 is satisfactory, how fast can you speed up the production
process and still achieve the desired MW? The activation energies for each reaction
step are: propagation ¼ 7 kcal/mol, initiator decomposition ¼ 27 kcal/mol, and termination ¼ 3 kcal/mol.

11

Calculate and plot as a function of conversion xw , <xw >, and the polydispersity index
<xw >/<xn > for the homogeneous, isothermal styrene polymerization of Examples 9.1 and 9.10.

12

Crud Chemicals is producing a polymer with minimum polydispersity by homogeneous, free-radical polymerization in a CSTR. The polymer terminates inherently by
disproportionation. To maintain and control the desired average chain length, they

REFERENCES

183

continuously feed chain-transfer agent to the reactor through a control valve. Things are
going along nicely, with the reactor in steady-state operation, when suddenly, the valve
in the chain-transfer feed line sticks open, adding chain-transfer agent at a much higher
rate than previously. They fiddle with the valve for a while but are unable to free it, so
before the reactor has had a chance to reach a new steady state, they simply close a gate
valve in the line, shutting off the flow of chain-transfer agent entirely. The reactor then
proceeds to a new steady state in the absence of additional chain-transfer agent.
Sketch qualitatively xn and <xn > on the same coordinates versus time for the period
described.
13

Modify Equation 9.76 to include chain transfer. Define any terms introduced.

14

A classical, Stage II, case 2 emulsion polymerization of styrene has the following
parameters:
N ¼ 3:2  1017 particles=L of reaction mass
½M ¼ 1:5 mol=L
½I ¼ 1:0  103 mol=L
kp ¼ 176 L=mols
kd ¼ 4:96  106 =s
a ¼ 2=3

Calculate:
(a) the rate of polymerization,
(b) xn , and
(c) the average lifetime of a growing chain.
15

Calculate and compare the average chain lifetime at the start of the reaction with the
monomer half-life for the system in Example 9.10. Is the concept of an instantaneous
quantity valid for this system? kt ¼ 14.5  106 L/mol/s.

16

A batch, free-radical polymerization is carried out with [M]o ¼ 1.0 mol/L and [I]o
¼ 2  104 mol/L. The reaction reaches a limiting conversion of 90%. Assume f ¼ 1.
(a) Calculate <xn > (t ! 1) assuming termination by disproportionation.
(b) Repeat part (a) with the addition of 6  104 mol/L of a mercaptan to the initial
charge.

17

A batch reactor producing a free-radical addition polymer is sampled at various
conversions. Analysis of these samples reveals that the weight-average chain length
varies linearly with conversion from 10,000 at X ¼ 0 to 5000 at X ¼ 1. The polymer is
known to terminate by combination and there is no significant chain transfer
occurring. Obtain an expression for the polydispersity index of the product as a
function of conversion.

REFERENCES
[1] Levenspiel, O., Chemical Reaction Engineering, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1972.
[2] Kenat, T., R.I. Kermode, and S.L. Rosen, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 13, 1353 (1969).
[3] Hoffman, B.F., S. Schreiber, and G. Rosen, Ind. Eng. Chem. 56(5), 51 (1964).
[4] Harkins, W.D., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 69, 1428 (1947).

184

FREE-RADICAL ADDITION (CHAIN-GROWTH) POLYMERIZATION

[5] Smith, W.V. and R.H. Ewart, J. Chem. Phys. 16(6), 592 (1948).
[6] Flory, P.J., Principles of Polymer Chemistry, Cornell UP, Ithaca, NY, 1953, Chapter V-3.
[7] Bovey, F.A., et al., Emulsion Polymerization, Interscience, New York, 1955.
[8] Gardon, J.L., Emulsion polymerization, Chapter 6 in Polymerization Processes, C. E. Schildknechtand I. Skeist (eds), Wiley, New York, 1977.
[9] Ugelstad, J. and F.K. Hansen, Rubber Chem. Technol. 49, 536 (1976).
[10] Blackley, D.C., Macromol. Chem. (London) 2, 31 (1982).
[11] Poehlein, G.W., Chapter 6 in Applied Polymer Science, 2nd ed., R.W. Tessand G. W. Poehlein
(eds), ACS Symposium Series 285, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 1985.
[12] Blackley, D.C., Emulsion Polymerization, Wiley, New York, 1975.
[13] Piirma, I. and J.L. Gardon (eds), Emulsion Polymerization, ACS Symposium Series 24,
American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 1976.
[14] Bassett, D.R.and A.E. Hamielec (eds), Emulsion Polymers and Emulsion Polymerization, ACS
Symposium Series 165, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 1981.
[15] Piirma, I. (ed.), Emulsion Polymerization, Academic, New York, 1982.
[16] Odian, G., Principles of Polymerization, Wiley, New York, 1991.

CHAPTER 10

ADVANCED POLYMERIZATION METHODS

10.1

INTRODUCTION

The previous two chapters covered two of the primary methods for forming polymers: stepgrowth (or condensation) polymerization and free-radical addition (or chain) polymerization. Of course, there are other ways to make really big polymers, and some of these
techniques have gained commercial importance due to their capabilities to form more
stereoregular (e.g., isotactic or syndiotactic) polymers, to decrease a polymer’s polydispersity, or to provide other methods to carefully control the polymer structure. This chapter
will introduce the basic concepts for some of the more common advanced polymerization
techniques: cationic, anionic, heterogeneous catalyzed (specifically the Ziegler–Natta
catalyst system), metallocene-catalyzed, ring-opening metathesis, and atom transfer
radical polymerizations.
10.2

CATIONIC POLYMERIZATION [1–4]

Strong Lewis acids, that is, electron acceptors, are often capable of initiating addition
polymerization of monomers with electron-rich substituents adjacent to the double bond.
Cationic catalysts are most commonly metal trihalides such as AlCl3 or BF3. These
compounds, although electrically neutral, are short of two electrons for having a
complete valence shell of eight electrons. Traces of a cocatalyst, usually water, are usually
required to initiate polymerization, first by grabbing a pair of electrons from the cocatalyst:
F
H
F:B + :O:
F
H

F H
F:B:O:
FH

F
[F:B:O:H]- [H]+
F

Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

185

186

ADVANCED POLYMERIZATION METHODS

The leftover proton (the cation) is thought to be the actual initiating species, abstracting
a pair of electrons from the monomer and leaving a cationic chain end that reacts
with additional monomer molecules (similar to the propagation step in free-radical
polymerization).
[BF3OH]

-

+

[H]

+

H CH3
C::C

H CH3
H:C:C] +

H CH3

H CH3

[BF3OH]-

etc.

Gegen or counter ion

An important point is that the gegen or counter ion (here, [BF3OH]) is electrostatically
held near the growing chain end and therefore can exert a steric influence on the addition of
monomer units. Termination is thought to occur by a disproportionation-like reaction that
regenerates the catalyst complex. This complex, therefore, is a true catalyst, unlike freeradical initiators:
H CH3
C–C]+
H CH3

H CH3
C–C=CH2
H

[BF3OH]-

+ BF3 • H2O

These reactions proceed very rapidly at low temperatures. For example, the polymerization of isobutylene illustrated above is carried out commercially at 150  F. The average
chain length actually formed increases as the temperature is lowered.
Cationic initiation is successful only with monomers having electron-rich substituents
adjacent to the double bond (like isobutylene), including
H H

H CH3

C=C

C=C

H O–R

H
a-Methyl styrene

Alkyl vinyl ethers

None of these monomers can be polymerized to high molecular weight with free-radical
initiators, therefore cationic polymerization plays an important role in commercial
production of these polymers.
10.3

ANIONIC POLYMERIZATION [5–7]

Addition polymerization may also be initiated by anions. Anionic polymerization has
achieved tremendous commercial importance in the past few decades because of its ability
to control molecular structure during polymerization, allowing the synthesis of materials
that were previously difficult or impossible to obtain. A variety of anionic initiators has
been investigated but the organic alkali-metal salts are perhaps the most common, as
illustrated below for the polymerization of styrene with n-butyllithium:
HH H H
H–C–C–C–C:]-

H H
[Li]+

+ C=C

HH H H

H f

n-Butyllithium (n-BuLi)

Styrene

H H H HHH
H–C–C–C–C:C:C:]- [Li]+
H H H HHf

The anionic () chain end then propagates the chain by adding another monomer
molecule. Again, the gegen ion can sterically influence the reaction.

ANIONIC POLYMERIZATION

187

Sodium and lithium metals were used to polymerize butadiene in Germany during
World War II. After the war, in the United States, it was discovered that under appropriate
conditions, dispersions of lithium could lead to largely cis-1,4 addition of butadiene and
isoprene (the latter being the synthetic counterpart of natural rubber). In these processes, a
metal atom first reacts with the monomer to form an anion radical:
H HH H
Li• + C::C:C::C
H

•

H

HH HH
C:C::C:C:]H

[Li]+

H

Anion radical

These anion radicals then react in either of two ways. One may react with another atom
of lithium
HH HH
Li• + C:C::C:C]H
HH HH
2 •C:C::C:C]H

[Li]+

+[Li]

H

[Li]+

HH HH
[:C:C::C:C:]-

-

H

+[Li]

H

-

[Li]+

H

H H H HH H H H
[:C–C=C–C:C–C=C–C:]H

HH

[Li]+

H

and/or two may rapidly undergo radical recombination.
Either way, the result is a dianion that propagates a chain from each end. Other dianionic
initiators have also been developed [5–8].
There are a couple of very interesting aspects to these reactions. First, the rates of initiation
and propagation vary with the monomer, gegen ion, and solvent. In general, the reactions
proceed more rapidly in polar solvents as the species are more highly ionized. (The polarity of
the solvent also strongly influences the stereospecific nature of the polymer.) In many
important cases, the rate of initiation is comparable to the rate of propagation, unlike freeradical addition, in which ri  rp. This means that the initiator (in this case, it is an initiator
rather than a catalyst) promptly starts growing chains. Second, in the absence of impurities,
there is no termination step. The chains continue to grow until the monomer supply is
exhausted. The ionic chain end is perfectly stable and the growth of the chains will resume if
more monomer is added. For this reason, these materials are aptly termed “living” polymers
and if additional monomer (or a different monomer) is later added, the reaction continues.
However, proton-donating impurities such as water or acids quickly kill (terminate) them:
H H
C–C:]−
H

[Li]+ + H2O

H H
C– C:H
H

+ LiOH

This unique mechanism has a number of practically important consequences.
10.3.1

Block Copolymerization

If a second monomer is introduced after the initial monomer, charge is exhausted and the
living chains resume propagation with the second monomer, neatly giving a block
copolymer. Monomers can be alternated as desired to give AB (diblock) or ABA (triblock)
or even more complicated block structures, conceivably even including three or more
different monomers.

188

10.3.2

ADVANCED POLYMERIZATION METHODS

Synthetic Flexibility

Anionic polymerization allows the synthesis of all sorts of interesting and useful molecules. For example, bubbling carbon dioxide through a batch of living chains followed by
exposure to water produces a carboxyl-terminated polymer:
H
C:]−
H

[Li]+

H O
C–C–O:]−
H

[Li]+

+ CO2

+ H2O

H O
C–C– O:]−
H

[Li]+

H O
C–C–OH + LiOH
H

Similarly, ethylene oxide gives hydroxyl-terminated chains:
H
C:]−
H

[Li]+

+

H2C– CH2
O

H H H
C–C–C–O:]− [Li]+ + H2O
H H H

H H H
C– C– C–O:]−
H H H
H H H
C–C–C–OH
H H H

[Li]+

+

LiOH

Note that if these reagents are added to a lithium-initiated dianion, both ends of the
chain will be capped with the functional group. Such chains are macro diacids or diols.
Carboxyl- or hydroxyl-terminated chains may then participate in the usual step-growth
polymerizations (see Chapter 8).
Once the monomer is exhausted in a reaction, if a tetrafunctional monomer such as
divinyl benzene (DVB), H2C¼CHHC¼CH2, is added to a batch of living chains, it
couples to itself and to the living chains. If it is assumed that a DVB molecule can react with
another DVB only at one end (there are probably good steric reasons why this should be so),
the following type of star polymer (or dendrimer) structures result with linear branches
radiating from a DVB core (Figure 10.1).

FIGURE 10.1 Schematic showing the attachment of several linear polymers to a core that contains
several DVB units linked together. The cartoon on the right depicts how a multifunctional core can
attach many polymer arms to make a star polymer.

ANIONIC POLYMERIZATION

189

It is conceivable that at this point, a second difunctional monomer could be added giving
a star polymer with two different kinds of branches, but normally, the reactor would be
opened and the reaction terminated. From the structure above, there are (b  1) moles of
DVB per mole of star branches, where b is the average number of branches per star.
Since the number of moles of star molecules is equal to the moles of living chains over the
average number of branches, and with an initiator such as n-BuLi (n-butyl lithium), each
molecule starts one living chain; to make a b-branch star polymer, one must add
NDVB ¼

ðb  1ÞIo
b

ð10:1Þ

moles of DVB, where Io is the moles of initiator charged to the reactor.
Living chains can also be linked by, for example, dichloro compounds, instantly
doubling their chain lengths:
2

H
C:]−
H

[Li]+ +

Cl–R–Cl

H H
C :R:C
H H

+ 2LiCl

With multifunctional linking agents, this technique can be used to form star polymers with
various numbers of branches. It would be nice if all the functional groups on such compounds
took part in the linking reaction, but sometimes steric factors lower the linking efficiency.
Multifunctional initiators can also be used to grow star polymers. Various initiators, linking
agents, and other reagents for anionic polymerization have been reviewed [5–8].
10.3.3

Monodisperse Polymers

Anionic polymerization is also quite useful at making polymers with narrow size
distributions. Consider a batch reactor containing, say, a 20% solution of styrene in the
solvent tetrahydrofuran (THF). A charge of n-BuLi is suddenly added. In this fairly polar
solvent, the n-BuLi ionizes immediately and completely and with ri  rp promptly starts
chains growing––one chain for each molecule of n-BuLi. In the absence of terminating
impurities, the number of growing chains remains constant and they compete on an even
basis for the available monomer. They will therefore have essentially the same length,
giving a nearly monodisperse polymer. Not only can anionic polymerization be used to
synthesize essentially monodisperse homopolymers but the blocks in the block copolymers
formed this way can also tailor to be monodisperse.
As with other modes of polymerization, the number-average chain length is given by the
moles of monomer polymerized over the moles of chains present. With an initiator like
n-BuLi, each molecule starts a single chain, therefore,
xn ¼

M0  M M0 X
¼
I0
I0

ð10:2Þ

(If the volume is constant, the moles may be bracketed to give concentrations.) Statistically,
the distribution of chain lengths is obtained by answering the following question: given
Mo  M marbles and Io buckets, what will be the distribution of marbles among the buckets

190

ADVANCED POLYMERIZATION METHODS

0.04

0.03
Poisson (113)

nx
— 0.02
N

0.01
Most probable (9.3), (10.42)

0.00

0

100

200

300

x

FIGURE 10.2 Comparison of Poisson and most-probable number-fraction distributions of chain
lengths for xn ¼ 100.

if the marbles are thrown completely randomly into the buckets? The result is the Poisson
distribution from statistics:
n 
x

N

¼

 
ðxn Þx expðxn Þ expðx  xn Þ xn x
 pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
x
x!
ð2pxÞ

ð10:3Þ

(As written above, the distribution does not include the initiator residue.) To a good
approximation, the polydispersity index of this distribution is1
xw
1
1 þ
xn
xn

ð10:4Þ

from which it is seen that even at moderate xn values, the polymer is essentially
monodisperse. Figure 10.2 compares the Poisson distribution with the most probable
distribution, Equations 8.3 and 9.42, for xn values of 100. Because of their sharpness, the
number and weight distributions are almost identical.
As in the case of step-growth polymerization, the average chain length increases
continuously with conversion (Eq. 10.2). Unlike step-growth, the reaction mass
consists only of monomer molecules and polymer chains of essentially a single length.
Equations 10.2 and 10.3 characterize the polymer present.
Example 10.1 Starting with a batch reactor containing 1  103 moles of n-BuLi in dilute
solutions, suggest two methods for making the block copolymer [S]200[B]1000[S]200,
where [S] represents a styrene repeat unit and [B] represents a butadiene repeat unit.
Solution. If we let all reactions go to completion, X ¼ 1, then from Equation 10.2, Mo ¼ Iox
(since the blocks will be essentially monodisperse, the bar and n have been left off x).
1
There are important practical limitations of not being able to add or mix reagents instantaneously and uniformly,
and the almost inevitable presence of some terminating impurities. In practice, these always cause some additional
broadening of the distribution.

ANIONIC POLYMERIZATION

191

Add 200  103 ¼ 0.2 mol of styrene to the reactor. When it has completely reacted,
living polystyrene chains of x ¼ 200 have been formed. Then add 1000  103 ¼
1.0 mol of butadiene, and when it has completely reacted, add another 0.2 mol
styrene and react to completion before opening the reactor and terminating the chains.
(b) As before, start with 0.2 mol of styrene. When it has completely reacted, add
0.5 mol of butadiene and react to completion. Then, link the resulting 1  103 mol
of [S]200[B]500 living chains with 0.5  103 moles of a difunctional linking
agent ClRCl to give 0.5  103 mol of [S]200[B]500R[B]500[S]200.
Normally, the single R in the middle is insignificant.
(a)

Commercially, procedure (b) is preferred. To obtain the desired rubbery properties in the
central polybutadiene block, nonpolar hydrocarbon solvents are used to promote 1,4addition. These solvents slow down the crossover reaction from butadiene back to styrene
in procedure (a), leading to increased polydispersity in the second polystyrene block. The
linking reaction in (b) is imperfect, and commercial materials contain some diblock chains
along with the desired triblock. Also keep in mind that each time material is added to a
reactor, the probability of getting some terminating impurities increases.
It will be left as an end-of-chapter exercise to show how the polymer in Example 10.1
could be made by starting with a dianionic initiator.
Example 10.2 Consider the anionic batch polymerization of 1.0 mol of styrene in
tetrahydrofuran solution with 1.0  103 mol of n-BuLi initiator. Assume that ri  rp and
that mixing is perfect and instantaneous. At 50% conversion, 0.5  103 mol of water are
added to the reaction mass and the reaction is allowed to continue.
(a) At 100% conversion, what chain lengths will be present in the reaction mass?
(b) Calculate xn at 100% conversion.
Solution.
(a)

The initiator starts 1  103 mol of chains growing. At 50% conversion, the water
terminates half the chains. Thus, 1.0/4 mol of monomer is present in the 0.5  103
mol of terminated chains:
1:0
xðterminated chainsÞ ¼
¼ 500
4  0:5  103

The remaining 0.75 mol of monomer continues to grow in 0.5  103 mol of
unterminated chains:
1:0ð3=4Þ
¼ 1500
xðunterminated chainsÞ ¼
0:5  103
(b)

Since each initiator molecule starts a chain, at X ¼ 1,
xn ¼

M0
1:0
¼
¼ 1000
I0
1  103

or using Equation 5.2a
P
nx x ð0:5  103 Þð500Þ þ ð0:5  103 Þð1500Þ

¼
¼ 1000
xn ¼ P
nx
0:5  103 þ 0:5  103

192

ADVANCED POLYMERIZATION METHODS

10.4

KINETICS OF ANIONIC POLYMERIZATION [5,6,9]

A general description of anionic polymerization kinetics is complicated by the associations
that may occur, particularly in nonpolar (hydrocarbon) solvents. The rate of propagation is
proportional to the product of the monomer concentration and the concentration of active
living chains [P
x ]:
rp ¼ 

  
 
1
dM
¼ k p ½ M  P
x
V
dt

ð10:5Þ

With negligible association (e.g., in THF solvent or hydrocarbons at n-BuLi concentrations less than 104 mol), each initiator molecule starts a growing chain, and in the
absence of terminating impurities, the number of active living chains equals the number of
initiator molecules added,
P
x ¼ I0
rp ¼ 

ðconstantÞ

ð10:6Þ

  
  
1
dM
M
I0
¼ kp
V
V
dt
V

ð10:7Þ

or making use of the definition of conversion X (Eq. 9.14) and assuming that the volume of
the reaction mass is linear in the conversion (Eq. 9.17), we get
dX
1X
¼ kp ½I0
dt
1 þ «X

ð10:8Þ

Unlike the case for free-radical addition, this can be readily integrated for a batch reactor
([I]o is constant) to give
«X þ ð1 þ «Þlnð1  XÞ ¼ kp ½I0 t

ð10:9Þ

but it is still not easier to get X as an explicit function of t.
Because anionic polymerizations are generally carried out in rather dilute solutions in
inert solvents, volume changes with conversion tend to be much smaller than when
undiluted monomer is polymerized. This often justifies the neglect of volume change
(« ¼ 0) for which Equation 10.9 becomes
X ¼ 1  expðkp ½I0 tÞ

ð« ¼ 0Þ

ð10:10Þ

Example 10.3 For an isothermal reaction (constant kp) subject to the assumptions in
Example 10.2, obtain an expression that relates xn to time. Neglect volume change.
Solution. Combining Equations 10.2 and 10.10 gives
x¼

M0
ð1  exp kp ½I0 t Þ
I0

KINETICS OF ANIONIC POLYMERIZATION

193

Since the polymer will be essentially monodisperse, the bar and subscript have been left off
x. To use this expression, it would be necessary to know Vo, the initial volume of the
reaction mass, to get [I]o ¼ Io/Vo.
In n-BuLi polymerizations at high concentrations in nonpolar solvents, the chain ends are
present largely as inactive dimers, which dissociate slightly according to the equilibrium
K

ðP
x Þ2

Ð

Inactive dimer

2P
x
Active chains

where
K¼

2
½P
x
1
½ðP
x Þ2 

ð10:11Þ

The concentration of active chains is then
1=2
1=2
½ðP
½P
x ¼ K
x Þ

ð10:12Þ

Now it takes two initiator molecules to make one inactive dimer, therefore

½P
x  þ 2½ðPx Þ2  ¼ ½I0
|{z}

ð10:13Þ

Negligible

The rate of polymerization then becomes
rp ¼ 

 1=2
  
½I0
1
dM
¼ kp K 1=2
½M 
2
V
dt

ð10:14Þ

The low value of K, reflecting the presence of most chain, ends in the inactive
associated state (dimers) giving rise to low rates of polymerization in nonpolar solvents.
At very high concentrations, association may be even greater and the rate is essentially
independent of [I]o.
Example 10.4 Which type of isothermal reactor will produce the narrowest possible
distribution of chain lengths in an anionic polymerization: continuous stirred tank (CSTR),
batch (assume both are perfectly stirred), plug-flow tubular, or laminar-flow tubular?
Solution. As demonstrated in Example 10.3, the chain length depends on how long a chain
is allowed to grow. In a batch reactor, and an ideal plug-flow reactor, all chains react for the
same length of time; hence, the product will be essentially monodisperse. In CSTRs and
laminar-flow tubular reactors (which have a parabolic flow profile), the residence time of
chains in the reactor varies, causing a spread in the distribution. Keep in mind, however,
that ideal plug flow is a practical impossibility, particularly with highly viscous polymer
solutions. Compare these conclusions with those of Example 9.11.

194

ADVANCED POLYMERIZATION METHODS

10.5

GROUP-TRANSFER POLYMERIZATION

In the 1980s, the DuPont Company developed and patented [10] a new type of polymerization that mechanistically is similar to anionic polymerization. Group-transfer polymerization (GTP) has been defined as “polymerization of a,b-unsaturated esters, ketones,
nitriles, or amides, initiated by silyl ketene acetals [11].” It has most commonly been used
to polymerize acrylate and methacrylate monomers with the aid of anionic catalysts (they
are true catalysts here), such as the bifluoride ion, [FHF], or bioxyanions. GTP is
illustrated below for the polymerization of methyl methacrylate (MMA) with silyl ketene
acetal (SKA):
H3C O–Si(CH3)3
H3C H
C=C +
C=C
O=C H
H3C O
O
CH3
CH3
Initiator

Initiation

[FHF]

SKA

Monomer
MMA

H3C H CH3 O–Si(CH3)3
H3C–C–C–C=C
O
O=C H
O

CH3

CH3
Living chain

Propagation
H3C H CH3 O–Si(CH3)3
H3C—[ C–C ]
—x C=C
+ MMA
O
O=C H
O
CH3

CH3

H3C H
CH3 O–Si(CH3)3
H3C—[ C–C ]
—
—
C=C
(x +1)
O=C H
O
O
CH3
CH3

The initiating functionality is transferred to the growing end of the chain as each new
monomer unit is added. They are living chains as in anionic addition and can likewise be
used to produce monodisperse polymers, block copolymers, and, with the addition of
appropriate reagents, chains with desired terminal groups. They can also control stereoregularity in the chain.
Unlike with anionic addition, chain transfer can occur:
H3C H CH3 O–Si(CH3)3
H3C—[ C–C ]
—x C=C
+ RH
O
O=C H
Chain-transfer
O
CH3
agent
CH3

H3C H CH3 O
H3C—[ C–C ]
—x C=C–O–CH3
O=C H H
O
CH3

Living chain

R–Si(CH3)3

Dead chain

+

H CH3
C=C
H C=O
O
CH3
Monomer

H3C O–Si(CH3)3
C=C
H 2C O
R CH3
New initiator

+ R–Si(CH3)3

ATOM TRANSFER RADICAL POLYMERIZATION

195

As in anionic addition polymerization, chain length can be reduced by using more
initiators, but because these initiators are rather expensive, it is often preferable to use a
chain-transfer agent instead. Also, at low monomer concentrations, termination can occur
through cyclization of the chain end.

10.6

ATOM TRANSFER RADICAL POLYMERIZATION

A more recent development in living polymerizations that has shown great promise for
tailoring polymer structure and molecular weight is atom transfer radical polymerization
(ATRP). The discovery of ATRP in the 1990s [12] has led to the broadening of living
polymerizations, which can include a wide range of monomer types (including vinyl,
(meth)acrylates, styrenes, and epoxies). This is largely due to ATRP’s robust method of
synthesis that is less sensitive to the presence of impurities than anionic polymerization.
The reaction proceeds through the use of a relatively inexpensive copper complex as the
catalyst (Figure 10.3), which is normally bound to a ligand chemical, such as pyridine.
The reaction produces high molecular weight, narrowly disperse polymers. In addition
to the catalyst, ATRP requires an initiator, most often an alkyl halide (e.g., bromides and
chlorides). As with free-radical polymerization, the molecular weight of the resulting
polymer is inversely proportional to the amount of initiator used. One unique characteristic of the ATRP initiator is that multiple functionalities (i.e., multiple halide groups)
can influence the structure of the polymer; for instance, an initiator with six Br atoms
can grow up to six polymer chains from the same initiator molecule, creating a star
polymer.
In ATRP, there are reactive and dormant polymer species in equilibrium during the
polymerizations, which alternate between halide-capped polymers (dormant) and growing
(reactive) polymers with a free radical on the end. The choice of catalyst controls this
equilibrium which in turn influences the polymerization rate and the distribution of chain
lengths. The mechanism offers flexibility to conduct reactions in bulk, solution, or
emulsions/suspensions, just as free-radical polymerizations. Due to the capability to
polymerize a large range of monomers with an inexpensive catalyst in a reactor, where
purity is nearly as important as in anionic polymerizations, ATRP continues to grow in
popularity. For further information, review articles written by the inventors are
available [12,16].

FIGURE 10.3 Metal (often copper) ligand (M/L) structure to support ATRP reactions. Here, Pm
and Pmþc are polymers with length m and mþc, respectively, X is typically a halide atom, such as Cl
or Br, and the k’s are kinetic rate constants for activation (ka), deactivation (kda), and termination (kt).
Reprinted from [16] with permission from Elsevier.

196

ADVANCED POLYMERIZATION METHODS

10.7

HETEROGENEOUS STEREOSPECIFIC POLYMERIZATION [13–15]

Many monomers are gases at or near atmospheric temperature and pressure and can be
polymerized using solid catalysts (hence, multiple phases in a reactor or heterogeneous
reactions). In the early 1950s, Karl Ziegler in Germany observed that certain heterogeneous
catalysts based on transition metals would polymerize ethylene to a linear, high-density
material (HDPE, Chapter 5) at low pressure and temperature (compared to the existing
free-radical process for low-density polyethylene). Giulio Natta in Italy showed that
these catalysts would produce highly stereospecific poly a-olefins ([H2CCHR]x, where
R ¼ CnHm) (notably polypropylene) and polydienes. Ziegler and Natta shared the 1963
Nobel Prize in chemistry for their work. Almost simultaneously, scientists at Amoco and
Phillips in the United States developed heterogeneous catalysts based on Mo and Cr that
also produced linear polyethylene under mild conditions.
One example of a Ziegler–Natta catalyst system is titanium tetrachloride, TiCl4, and
aluminum triethyl, Al(C2H5)3. Vanadium and cobalt chlorides are also used as is
Al(C2H5)2Cl. When the substances are mixed in an inert solvent, a crystalline solid is
obtained along with a highly colored supernatant (deep violet or brown). It is known that
the reaction involves the reduction of the titanium to a lower valence state, probably þ2,
since TiCl3 also forms an effective catalyst. The supernatant liquid alone will polymerize a
olefins, but the resulting polymers show little stereospecificity. Commercial catalyst
systems are based on the solid, either alone or on a support such as SiO2 or MgCl2.
A “Phillips” catalyst typically consists of CrO3 supported on silica or alumina.
Polymerization with Ziegler–Natta catalysts is thought to occur at active sites formed by
interaction of the metal alkyl with a metal chloride on the surface of the metal chloride
crystals. Monomer is chemisorbed at the site (thus accounting for its specific orientation
when added to the chain), and propagation occurs by insertion of the chemisorbed
monomer into the metal-chain bond at the active site.
site-Px + M → site-Px+1

The chain thus grows out from the site like a hair from the scalp.
Hydrogen is used as a chain-transfer agent in these reactions:
site  Px þ H2 ! site  H þ H  Px
Chain transfer with the metal alkyl component in Ziegler–Natta systems has been
identified as
site  Px þ AlðRÞ3 ! site  R þ AlðRÞ2  Px
and transfer to monomer may also occur.
Most commercial processes based on these catalysts are carried out with the monomers
either in the gas phase or in the liquid phase at temperatures such that the polymer
precipitates as it is formed. Solid, porous catalyst particles in the range of 10–100 mm are
introduced to the reactor. As polymer begins to form, they rapidly break up into many

HETEROGENEOUS STEREOSPECIFIC POLYMERIZATION

197

Polymer

Catalyst

Microparticle

Initial
catalyst
particle

FIGURE 10.4

Primary
catalyst
crystallite
Growing polymer
macroparticle

Mechanism of particle formation in Ziegler–Natta polymerization [17].

smaller (0.01–1 mm) fragments (primary crystallites) on which the polymer continues to
grow. The reaction mass therefore consists of a suspension (not an emulsion—there is no
surfactant) of macroparticles, which are in turn made up of an agglomeration of microparticles, each of which surrounds a primary crystallite (Figure 10.4). According to Ray
and coworkers [17], the macroparticle usually remains intact so that one is generated from
each catalyst particle fed to the reactor. The primary catalyst crystallites are distributed
more or less uniformly throughout the ultimate macroparticle.
If you are not yet convinced that these are complex systems, consider the following. The
catalysts consist of two or more components, the nature and relative amounts of which
influence the rate of polymerization. Each catalyst particle contains a multiplicity of
surface sites on which polymer can grow and they may differ in activity (e.g., due to
different crystal faces). Sites may be deactivated so that their number decreases with time.
The monomer must be chemisorbed on the catalyst surface before it can be added to a
chain. And before it even gets to the catalyst surface it must diffuse from the bulk fluid to
the surface of the macroparticle through the interstices (pores) between the microparticles
and finally through the layer of solid polymer that coats the catalyst fragment within each
microparticle. Furthermore, the heat of polymerization is liberated at the surface of the
catalyst fragments that must flow outward. This could give rise to significant temperature
gradients, complicating the interpretation of experimental data and limiting the validity of
isothermal rate expressions. It should not be surprising, therefore, that kinetic equations
are significantly more complex to describe this reaction than those for free-radical and
anionic addition polymerizations. However, the relevance of this catalyst system is of great
industrial importance as tens of billions of pounds of polymer are produced with these
catalyst systems each year. The following discussion illustrates some of the approaches that
have been taken to describe the kinetics in systems with two-component Ziegler–Natta
catalysts such as the TiCl4–Al(C2H5)3 system mentioned above.
The mechanism developed to describe the reaction is based on four assumptions [18]:
1. The propagation reaction occurs on active sites on the surface of the metal halide
crystals.
2. Active sites are formed by the reaction of chemisorbed metal alkyls with metal halide
on the crystal surface.

198

ADVANCED POLYMERIZATION METHODS

3. The propagation reaction occurs between a growing chain on the active site and an
adjacent chemisorbed monomer molecule.
4. The metal alkyl competes with monomer for adsorption on the crystal surface.
Let C represent the number of catalytic sites on the catalyst surface, presumably associated
with the Ti. Before a chain can grow on a site, however, the site must be activated by
chemisorption of the Al(C2H5)3 on an adjacent site. Therefore,
Cp* ¼ CA

ð10:15Þ

where Cp* is the number of growing chains stuck to the catalyst surface and A is the
fraction of the surface covered by chemisorbed alkyl.
The rate of polymerization is given by
rp ¼ ks Cp* M ¼ ks CM A

ð10:16Þ

where ks is the insertion rate constant, which characterizes the rate of insertion of
chemisorbed monomer into the Ti-chain bond, and M is the fraction of the surface
covered by chemisorbed monomer.
Monomer and metal alkyl compete for chemisorption on the uncovered fraction of the
active surface, M ¼ (1  M  A)
kMþ1

M þ S L MS
kM1

kAþ1

A þ S L AS
kA1

ðchemisorbed monomerÞ
ðchemisorbed alkylÞ

where S represents a surface site:
Rate of monomer adsorption ¼ kMþ1 ð1  M  A Þ½Ms 

ð10:17Þ

Rate of monomer desorption ¼ kM1 M

ð10:18Þ

Rate of alkyl adsorption ¼ kAþ1 ð1  M  A Þ½As 

ð10:19Þ

Rate of alkyl desorption ¼ kA1 A

ð10:20Þ

[Ms] and [As] are the concentrations of monomer and alkyl at the surface. If we assume
steady-state surface concentrations of both monomer and alkyl and equate the rates of
adsorption and desorption of each we get
M ¼

KM ½Ms 
1 þ KM ½Ms  þ KA ½As 

ð10:21Þ

A ¼

KA ½As 
1 þ KM ½Ms  þ KA ½As 

ð10:22Þ

and

HETEROGENEOUS STEREOSPECIFIC POLYMERIZATION

199

where KM ¼ kMþ1/kM1 and KA ¼ kAþ1/kA1 are the equilibrium constants for monomer
and alkyl adsorption onto the catalyst. Equations 10.21 and 10.22 are Langmuir–Hinshelwood absorption isotherms, which when inserted into Equation 10.16 gives [19]2:
rp ¼ ks C

KA ½As KM ½Ms 
ð1 þ KA ½As  þ KM ½Ms Þ2

ð10:23Þ

Equation 10.23 appears to give a reasonable description of experimental results.
For example, the activity of a catalyst can be greatly enhanced kby ball milling and/or
dispersing it on the surface of a support such as MgCl2, both of which increase the exposed
surface area, and therefore C. A maximum in rate is generally observed as the alkyl
concentration is increased. Actually, almost all experiments show the rate to be the first
order in monomer concentration, and Equation 10.23 is not linear in monomer. This simply
means that KM[Ms]  1, which is generally agreed to be the case.
With a little creative algebra, Equation 10.23 can be put into a simpler and more
convenient form:
rp ¼ ks KM Cp 0 ½Ms  ¼ kp C* ½Ms 

ð10:24Þ

where kp ¼ ksKM is a propagation rate constant and C ¼ Cp o is interpreted as the number
of active growing chains, that is, those that possess an open adjacent site for the
chemisorption of monomer or alkyl. Again, because
0 ¼ ð1  M  A Þ ¼

1
1 þ KA ½As  þ KM ½Ms 

ð10:25Þ

is a function of monomer concentration, Equation 10.24 is not the first order in monomer
unless KM[Ms]  1, which generally seems to be the case. Equation 10.24 is the form
usually used by chemical engineers to describe Ziegler–Natta polymerizations.
Example 10.5 Estimate (a) the average lifetime of a growing chain and (b) the rate of
polymerization for the polymerization of propylene in a heptane slurry (suspension) with a
modern, high-activity Ziegler–Natta catalyst under conditions such that kp ¼ 660 L/mol-s,
C* ¼ 105 mol/g catalyst, [Ms] ¼ 4.0 mol/L [19], and xn ¼ 5000. (c) Also, estimate how
long the reaction must be carried out under these conditions to achieve a catalyst
yield of 10,000 g polymer/g catalyst (which is desirable to avoid a costly catalyst removal
step). [Ms] is kept constant by bubbling gas-phase monomer into the reactor as polymerization proceeds.
Solution.
(a)

By analogy to Example 9.9, tis given by the average number of monomer units in a
chain (xn ) times the number of growing chains (C*) divided by the rate at which

2
It should be noted that when dealing with heterogeneous reactions such as these, rates are usually given per unit
moles or mass of catalyst rather than per unit of reactor volume, as is the case for homogeneous reactions. In
Equation 10.23, for example, the rate would typically be in mol monomer/mol Ti (or TiCl4) s.

200

ADVANCED POLYMERIZATION METHODS

monomer is added to all chains (rp):
t ¼

xn C *
xn
¼
rp
kp ½Ms 

¼
(b)


rp ¼ 

1
mcat


¼

600



5000 mol mon=mol chains
¼ 1:9s
ð660 L=mol chains  sÞð4:0 mol mon=LÞ

dM
dt


¼ kp ½Ms C *

L
mol chains  s


 5

mom mon
10 mol chains
4:0
L
g cat

¼ 0:0264 mol mon=g cat-s
or, because the molecular weight of propylene is 42
rp ¼ 0:0264  42 g=gmol  3600 s=h ¼ 4000 g polymer=g cat-h
(c)

So, to get the specified catalyst yield, the reaction must be carried out for
10,000/4000 ¼ 2.5 h. Note that the rate of polymerization is based on the mass
of catalyst rather than the volume. The reaction time here is much greater than the
average chain lifetime (like free-radical addition and unlike anionic addition), but
the ratio is not as great as in a typical free-radical process.

Unfortunately, things are not always as simple as the last example in real life. For one thing,
catalyst activity usually drops with time (due to fouling) even in the absence of
polymerization. Catalyst half-lives typically are in the order of minutes to hours. This
is explained by a progressive deactivation of the sites responsible for polymerization, C*,
and is described quantitatively with an nth-order deactivation law:
dC*
¼ k* ðC * Þn
dt

ð10:26Þ

Currently, second-order deactivation n ¼ 2 seems to be the most popular, but n ¼ 1 and
n ¼ 3 have also been used to fit data.
Example 10.6 Rework Example 10.5(c), but now assume that the catalyst deactivates by a
second-order mechanism with a half-life of 1 h.
Solution. Integration of Equation 10.26 with n ¼ 2 and C ¼ Co at t ¼ 0 gives
C* ¼

C0
1 þ C0 k t

because C =Co ¼ 0:5 at t ¼ t1/2, t1=2 ¼ 1=Co k*. By inserting the above into Equation 10.24, we get

HETEROGENEOUS STEREOSPECIFIC POLYMERIZATION

rp ¼ 

201

kp C0 ½Ms 
1 dM
¼
1 þ C0 k t
mcat dt

Separating variables (remember that [Ms] is constant here) gives
ð
ðt
1 M
dt

dM ¼ kp C0 ½Ms 
mcat MO
1
þ
C0 k t
0
and integrating gives


M0  M kp C0 ½Ms 
t
¼
lnð1 þ C0 k tÞ ¼ kp C0 ½Ms t1=2 ln 1 þ
C0 k
mcat
t1=2
Now (Mo  M)/mcat ¼ 10,000 g/g cat/42 g/mol ¼ 238 mol/g cat. Using this value, t1/2 ¼ 1 h,
the parameters from Example 10.5 and solving for t gives t ¼ 11.3 h. Compared with
the result (2.5 h) of Example 10.5(c), this illustrates the practical consequences of a
deactivating catalyst.

Another complication is the possibility of mass-transfer limitations on the reaction rate.
And, because the polymer layer grows, mass transfer resistance will increase during a
heterogeneous polymerization; it is quite possible that the polymerization will start out
reaction-limited and change to mass transfer-limited as the conversion increases. To
polymerize, monomer must first diffuse from the bulk fluid surrounding the macroparticles,
where its concentration is [Mb], to the catalytic surface within the microparticles, where
its concentration is [Ms]. Where the inherent rate of reaction on the catalytic surface and/or
the resistance to diffusion are high, the overall reaction rate can be determined by the
physics of diffusion rather than the chemistry of the reaction.
Another way of putting this is that [Ms] < [Mb]. To use Equation 10.23 or 10.24, [Ms]
must be known. Relating [Ms] to [Mb] is a complex problem in mass transfer and is beyond
the scope of this chapter. It is treated and explained in the literature [20,21]. Suffice it to say
that to make calculations, you need to know the geometry of the particles, the mass-transfer
coefficient at the surface of the macroparticles, the effective diffusivity for the monomer in
the interstices (pores) between the microparticles, and the diffusivity of the monomer
through the layer of polymer coating the primary catalyst particles (in addition to knowing
the kinetic parameters of the reaction).
Calculations show that rates can be mass-transfer limited, depending on the activity of
the catalyst and the physical properties of the system. One rather unusual result is that the
resistance to mass transfer can decrease with time, causing an increase in rate (at constant
[Mb]). This increase, when combined with a deactivating catalyst, gives rise to a maximum
in the polymerization rate with time. The parameters in Example 10.5 represent a case that
is not mass-transfer limited, therefore we can assume that [Ms]  [Mb].
If all the polymer-producing sites on a catalyst surface had the same activity and were
exposed to the same monomer concentration, and if chain transfer occurred randomly, we
would expect the polymer to have a most-probable distribution of chain lengths (Eq. 9.47)
with a polydispersity index of 2.0 [22]. Polymers produced with these heterogeneous
catalysts typically have large polydispersity indices (from 3 to 20), however. Two reasons
have been advanced for these broad distributions: (1) mass-transfer resistance, which

202

ADVANCED POLYMERIZATION METHODS

causes with monomer concentration to vary with location and perhaps time in the particles,
and (2) a range of site activities (kp’s) on the catalyst surface. Different types of sites have
been identified on the surfaces [22].
Recent calculations show that while mass-transfer limitations can contribute somewhat
to a broadening of the distribution, a range of site activities is needed to account for the
observed polydispersities. Furthermore, the different sites must have a pretty wide range of
activities [20]. To examine the effects of site heterogeneity, Equation 10.24 must be
generalized to
rp ¼ ½Ms 

N
X
i¼1

kpi Ci

ð10:27Þ

where N is the number of different types of sites and
kp C ¼

X

kpi Ci

ð10:28Þ

You can get large polydispersity indices with only two types of catalyst sites, provided
that they have a large enough difference (at least an order of magnitude) in activities.
However, this results in a bimodal (two-peaked) molecular weight distribution, which is not
generally seen in practice. In some applications, narrow molecular weight distributions are
desirable. Relatively small polydispersity indices in the range of three to four have been
reported for systems where the catalyst is supported on MgCl2 (which could be due to
selective promotion of certain types of sites) or when additives are used (which may
selectively poison certain types of sites) [21]. Single-site (e.g., EXXPOL metallocene)
catalysts have also been developed to avoid the problem of high polydispersity [22,23].
The question of temperature gradients in the particles has also been addressed. The
conclusion is that they are generally not significant, except in the very early stages of gasphase polymerizations, where temperatures may get high enough to melt the polymer [24].
In practice, Ziegler–Natta catalyst systems are difficult to work with. Great care must
be exercised in their preparation and use, since they are easily poisoned by water,
among other things. They are pyrophoric (spontaneously burst into flame on contact with
oxygen) and are used in close proximity to large amounts of flammable monomers and
solvents. Therefore, they can present a significant safety hazard both in the laboratory and
in the plant.

10.8

GRAFTED POLYMER SURFACES

Grafting a polymer onto a surface is a great way to change the surface properties of a
material. This can be done to improve the compatibility between layers in a composite
material, to reduce surface fouling, or to improve biocompatibility (among many potential
applications). Because living polymerizations can be used for good control of polymer
properties, they are often used in graft polymerizations.
The grafting method normally follows one of two patterns (Figure 10.5): grafting to or
grafting from. In the first method, oligomers or polymers are pre made (and can easily be
characterized for molecular weight and polydispersity) and attached to a surface through
any number of chemistries (several condensation reactions can be used here). In grafting

PROBLEMS

F MIM M
M I M
F M
M M
I
F I M
M

M
F MM M

F M
•

FM

•

F M

FM

F M

FM

•

Grafting from a surface
(graft polymerization)

•

Grafting to a surface

•

203

M MM
FM
M
M M M MM
FM M M
M M MM

FIGURE 10.5 Depiction of methods to form a surface grafted with polymers. (a) Grafting from a
surface by growing a polymer chain from surface functional groups (F). (b) Grafting to a surface by
attaching a premade polymer to functional groups (F) on the surface.

from method, the surface must be activated (i.e., form a free-radical or growing living
polymer complex) through which monomer can add. In this second technique, the grafts are
more difficult to analyze, since the molecular weight and polydispersity cannot be
determined without destroying the surface (or at least removing the grafts). Although
this drawback may seem to favor grafting to techniques, a balancing disadvantage of the
grafting to technique is that the large oligomers or polymers may have significant steric
hindrances or diffusive resistance in reaching the surface for binding. This results in a
surface that has a lower graft coverage (graft density). Grafting techniques are discussed
further by Bhattarcharya and Misra [25].
10.9

SUMMARY

The various advanced polymerization methods described in this chapter highlight some of
the more important mechanisms that can be used for polymerizations. Living polymerizations offer the ability for more precise control of polymer structures, including block, graft,
and star polymers, whereas heterogeneous catalysis (such as the Ziegler–Natta polymerizations) offers the benefit of improved stereoregularity. It is beyond the scope of
this textbook to go beyond an introduction of these techniques, but these polymerizations
(and others such as reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerizations and nitroxide-mediated polymerization (NMP)) are treated in greater depth
elsewhere [25–27].
PROBLEMS
1

Given that a reactor contains 4.000 mol styrene in solution and supplies of n-BuLi and
a tetrafunctional linking agent R(Cl)4, list the amounts and order of addition of
reagents necessary to produce a four-star polymer with branches of length x ¼ 1000.
Assume complete and instantaneous ionization, perfect linking, and no terminating
impurities.

2

A reactor initially contains 1.00  103 mol of n-BuLi in a dry, inert solvent. 1.00 mol
of styrene (S) is added to the reactor. At 50% conversion, 0.250  103 mol of a

204

ADVANCED POLYMERIZATION METHODS

difunctional linking agent, ClRCl, is added to the reactor. The reaction is then
allowed to go to completion. The assumptions in Problem 10.1 apply.
(a) Describe quantitatively the reactor product (how many moles of what).
(b) Calculate xn for the product.
3

Repeat Problem 10.2, but replace the linking agent with an additional 1.00  103 mol
of n-BuLi.

4

Repeat Problem 10.2, but replace the linking agent with 1.00  103 mol of a
dianionic initiator, þ[Li][:R:][Li]þ.

5

Consider anionic addition polymerization in which most of the chain ends are
associated in inactive aggregates of n chain ends. The aggregates dissociate slightly
to active chain ends according to the equilibrium relation
K


ðP
x Þn Ð nPx

where K  1. Obtain an expression for the rate of polymerization.
6

Describe quantitatively how the polymer of Example 10.1 could be made with the
dianionic initiator of Problem 10.4.

7

Describe how you would make a block copolymer of butadiene and nylon 6/6 (see
Example 2.4E).

8

Obtain an expression for the number-average chain length at complete conversion in a
group-transfer polymerization batch that contains I, M, and RH moles of initiator,
monomer, and chain-transfer agent, respectively.

9

The following mechanism has been proposed to explain cationic polymerization
(do not bet the farm on it):
Ionization
Initiation
Propagation
Termination

K

GH Ð G Hþ
kO


G Hþ þ M! Pþ
1G
kp


þ

Pþ
x G þ M! Pxþ1 G
kt


Pþ
x G ! Px þ GH

Here, GH is the catalyst and G is the gegen ion. The ionization step is assumed to be
essentially instantaneous, and always at equilibrium, with K being the equilibrium
constant. Obtain expressions for the rate of polymerization and the number-average
chain length according to this mechanism.
10

Consider an ideal anionic polymerization, the type that when carried out in a batch
reactor would produce monodisperse polymer. Here, however, the reaction is to be
carried out in a perfectly micromixed CSTR in which the steady-state monomer
concentration is [M]. The average residence time t ¼ V/Q, where V is the reactor

REFERENCES

205

volume and Q is the volumetric flow rate. The residence–time distribution for such a
reactor is
 t
1
EðtÞ ¼ exp 
t
t
where E(t)dt is the fraction of the material in the product stream that has resided in the
reactor for time t. Assume that chains grow only while being in the reactor.
In terms of parameters defined above, obtain expressions for xn, (n/N), (w/W) (the
number- and weight-fraction distributions of chain lengths), and the polydispersity
index xw /xn . Does any of these look familiar?
11

Write the expressions giving conversion as a function of time for the reaction in
Example 10.2(b).

12

Consider a Ziegler–Natta polymerization in which chains are terminated only by
chain transfer with hydrogen. The rate of transfer is given by rtr ¼ ktrC*[H2].
(a) Obtain an expression for xn in terms of concentrations and rate constants.
Assume sites of uniform activity.
(b) Obtain the expression for the number-fraction distribution of chain lengths,
(n/N) (x) for case (a). What is the polydispersity index for this distribution?

13

A gas-phase Ziegler–Natta polymerization is carried out in a constant-volume,
isothermal batch reactor. Assume that surface monomer concentration is always
proportional to bulk monomer concentration, [Ms] ¼ k[Mb]. Obtain expressions for
conversion as a function of time for two cases:
(a) With a constant-activity catalyst.
(b) With a catalyst that deactivates according to a second-order mechanism.
Define any parameters you need that are not defined in the chapter.

14

Define in terms of parameters the optimum alkyl concentration for maximum polymer
production in Equation 10.23.

REFERENCES
[1] Plesch, P.H. (ed.), The Chemistry of Cationic Polymerization, MacMillan, New York, 1963.
[2] Russell, K.E. and G.J. Wilson. Cationic polymerizations, in Polymerization Processes, C. E.
Schildknecht and I. Skeist (eds), Wiley, New York, 1977, Chapter 10.
[3] Percec, V., Recent developments in cationic polymerization, in Applied Polymer Science, 2nd
ed. , R.W Tess and G.W. Poehlein (eds), American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 1985,
Chapter 5.
[4] Odian, G., Principles of Polymerization, 4th ed., John Wiley and Sons, New York, 2004,
Chapter 5-2.
[5] Morton, M., Anionic Polymerizations: Principles and Practice, Academic, New York, 1983.
[6] Swarc, M., Living Polymerizations and Mechanisms of Anionic Polymerization, Springer,
Berlin, Germany, 1983.
[7] McGrath, J.E. (ed.), Anionic Polymerization: Kinetics, Mechanisms and Synthesis, American
Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 1981.

206

ADVANCED POLYMERIZATION METHODS

[8] Franta, E. and P. Rempp, Polym. Prepr. 20(1), 5 (1979).
[9] Odian, G., op. cit. Chapter 5-3.
[10] United States patents 4,414,372 and 4,417,034.
[11] Stinson, S.C., Chem. Eng. News, April 27, 1983, p. 43.
[12] Keii, T., Kinetics of Ziegler-Natta Polymerization, Chapman Hall, London, U.K., 1972.
[13] Chien, J.C.W. (ed.), Coordination Polymerization, Academic, New York, 1975.
[14] Karol, F.J., Coordinated anionic polymerization and polymerization mechanisms, in Applied
Polymer Science, 2nd ed., R.W. Tess and G.W. Poehlein (eds), American Chemical Society,
Washington, DC, 1985, Chapter 4.
[15] Matyjaszewski, K. and J. Xia, Chem. Rev. 101(9), 2921 (2001).
[16] Coessens, V., T. Pintauer, and K. Matyjaszewski, Prog. Polym. Sci. 26(3), 337 (2001).
[17] Floyd, S., T. Heiskanen, and W.H. Ray, Chem. Eng. Progr. 85(11), 56 (1988).
[18] Tait, P.J.T., Chem. Technol. 5, 688 (1975).
[19] Keii, T., et al., Makromol. Chem. 183, 2285 (1982).
[20] Floyd, S., et al., J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 33, 1021 (1987).
[21] Floyd, S., et al., J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 32, 2935 (1986).
[22] Anon., Mod. Plast. 68(7), 61 (1991); Leaversuch, R.D., Mod. Plast. 68(10), 46 (1991); Anon.,
Chem. Eng. News, Dec. 23, 1991, p. 16.
[23] Anon., Chem. Eng. Prog. 87(10), 21 (1991).
[24] Zucchini, U. and G. Cecchin, Adv. Polym. Sci. 51, 101 (1983).
[25] Bhattarcharya, A. and B.N. Misra, Prog. Polym. Sci. 29(8), 767 (2004).
[26] Matyjaszewski, K. Controlled/Living Radical Polymerizations: From Synthesis to Materials,
ACS Symposium Series 944, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 2006.
[27] Buchmeiser, M. Metathesis Polymerization, Advances in Polymer Science Series, SpringerVerlag, New York, 2009.

CHAPTER 11

COPOLYMERIZATION

11.1

INTRODUCTION

Copolymers can be easily made by either step-growth or free-radical addition polymerization. By linking together different monomers into the same polymer chain, several
properties (hydrophilicity, rigidity, opacity, etc.) can be tuned. Although a mixture of many
different monomers can be polymerized, the complexity and randomness of copolymers
that have more than two or three different repeat units make them difficult to characterize
and, generally, not useful in practice. However, in nature, proteins are synthesized by
combination of 20 different amino acids, while synthetic copolymers tend to contain only
two or three different repeat units. One important distinction is that biology has evolved an
efficient way to code for the regular synthesis of proteins (polypeptides) by arranging the
amino acid repeat units carefully. This specified order of amino acids allows proteins to
fold into the three-dimensional shapes necessary for biological functions. Although some
synthetic polypeptides can be made, this chapter focuses on more standard commercially
important copolymers, their formation, and differences in characterization from homopolymers. One other caveat is that this chapter will focus on random copolymers, where
monomers are mixed together prior to polymerization. More sophisticated techniques are
required to make block and graft copolymers, since the monomers must be reacted in a
specific order to form these more complex structures.
11.2

MECHANISM

We have seen in the previous chapters how the composition of a random copolymer can
influence many of its important properties, including solubility, degree of crystallinity, Tg,
and Tm. The control of copolymer composition is therefore of great practical importance.
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
Ó 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

207

208

COPOLYMERIZATION

From a practical standpoint, most copolymers are made by free-radical addition
polymerization, although step-growth polymerization can also be used. For the sake of
simplicity in our discussion, we will focus only on the free-radical mechanism. A
quantitative treatment of random copolymerization is based on the assumption that the
reactivity of a growing chain depends only on its active terminal unit. Therefore, when two
monomers, M1 and M2, are copolymerized, there are four possible propagation reactions1:
Reaction

Rate Equation

11
P1  þ M1 k!
P1 

k11 ½P1  ½M1 

12
P1  þ M2 k!
P2 

k12 ½P1  ½M2 

ð11:2Þ

P2  þ M2 k22
! P2 

k22 ½P2  ½M2 

ð11:3Þ

21
P2  þ M1 k!
P1 

k21 ½P2  ½M1 

ð11:4Þ

ð11:1Þ

The first subscript on the rate constants designates the nature of the chain end and the
second identifies the monomer being added to the chain.
Application of the steady-state assumption to all polymer free-radical species (P1 and
P2) requires that they be generated and consumed at equal rates. P1’s are generated in
Reaction 11.4 and consumed in Reaction 11.2. Note that Reaction 11.1 just converts one
P1 into another one, with not net change in their number. Therefore,
k12 ½P1  ½M2  ¼ k21 ½P2  ½M1 

ð11:5Þ

The rates of consumption of monomers M1 and M2 are

 
1
dM1
¼ k11 ½P1  ½M1  þ k21 ½P2  ½M1 
dt
V

ð11:6Þ


 
1
dM2
¼ k12 ½P1  ½M2  þ k22 ½P2  ½M2 

dt
V

ð11:7Þ



Dividing Equation 11.6 by Equation 11.7, eliminating the [P]’s with Equation 11.5, and
recalling that Mi ¼ [Mi]V gives


dM1 M1 r1 M1 þ M2
¼
dM2 M2 M1 þ r2 M2

ð11:8Þ

where r1 and r2 are the reactivity ratios.
1
The notation has been changed a bit here to conform to the existing literature. The subscripts 1 and 2 designate
the two monomers being copolymerized, not the number of repeating units. Thus, P1 represents a growing chain
(of any length) with a terminal unit of monomer 1, that is, a chain to which a monomer M1 was the last added.
Although the mathematics of copolymerization looks the same for the various types of addition polymerization,
there are some important mechanistic differences which will be discussed later.

SIGNIFICANCE OF REACTIVITY RATIOS

r2 ¼

k22
¼ relative preference of P2  for M2 =M1
k21

r1 ¼

k11
¼ relative preference of P1  for M1 =M2
k12

209

The reactivity ratio is a measure of the likelihood of a polymer to react with a monomer of
same type (Equations 11.1 or 11.3) as opposed to adding the opposite comonomer
(Equations 11.2 or 11.4. Reactivity ratios are experimentally determined [1] or may be
estimated [2]. In organic free-radical copolymerizations, for a given monomer pair, they are
pretty much independent of initiator and solvent and are only weakly temperature dependent.
In ionic copolymerizations, however, they depend strongly on the gegen ion and solvent.
This relation may be put in a more convenient form by defining the following:
f1 ¼ mole fraction of monomer 1 in the reaction mass at any instant
F1 ¼ mole fraction of monomer 1 in the copolymer formed at that instant
F1 ¼ ð1  F2 Þ ¼

dM1
dðM1 þ M2 Þ

ð11:9Þ

f1 ¼ ð1  f2 Þ ¼

M1
ðM1 þ M2 Þ

ð11:10Þ

If monomer 1 is much more reactive than monomer 2, f1 will decrease at the beginning of
the polymerization, while F1 will be higher than the feed composition of monomer 1.
Combination of Equations 11.8–11.10 (if you enjoy algebra, you really ought to try this
one) gives
F1 ¼

r1 f12 þ f1 f2
ðr1  1Þf12 þ f1
¼
r1 f12 þ 2f1 f2 þ r2 f22 ðr1 þ r2  2Þf12 þ 2ð1  r2 Þf1 þ r2

ð11:11Þ

F1 ¼ F1 ðr1 ; r2 ; f1 Þ
xn , the
The quantity F1, the instantaneous copolymer composition, is analogous to 
instantaneous number-average chain length in free-radical addition polymerization. Like 
xn ,
it depends on the conditions in the reactor at a particular instant. It, too, is really an average, since
not all the copolymer formed at a particular instant has exactly the same composition. However,
the instantaneous distribution of compositions is normally much narrower than the instantaneous distribution of chain lengths, and because the fact that it is an average is not normally of
great practical importance and cannot be controlled anyhow, the overbar is left off of F1.
11.3

SIGNIFICANCE OF REACTIVITY RATIOS

To gain an appreciation for the physical significance of Equation 11.11, let us look at some
special cases of the reactivity ratios.

210

COPOLYMERIZATION

Case 1: r1 ¼ r2 ¼ 0. With both reactivity ratios zero, neither type of chain end can add its
own monomer, so a perfectly alternating copolymer results. F1 ¼ 0.5 regardless of f1,
until one of the monomers is used up, the point at which polymerization stops.
Case 2: r1 ¼ r2 ¼ 1. Here, P1’s can add only M1 monomer, and P2’s only M2, so the
polymer formed will be a physical mixture of homopolymer 1 and homopolymer 2 chains.
Case 3: r1 ¼ r2 ¼ 1. Under these conditions, the growing chains find the monomers
equally attractive, so the addition depends only on the ratio of the monomers in the
vicinity of the chain ends, F1 ¼ f1.
Case 4: r1r2 ¼ 1. This is the so-called ideal copolymerization, where each chain displays
the same preference for one of the monomers over the other: k11/k12 ¼ k21/k22, so it
does not matter what is at the end of the chain. In this case, Equation 11.11 reduces to
F1 ¼

r1 f1
ðr1  1Þf1 þ 1

ð11:12Þ

The reader familiar with distillation theory will note here the exact analogy between
Equation 11.12 and the vapor–liquid equilibrium composition relation for ideal solutions with a constant relative volatility.
Case 5: r1 < 1, r2 < 1. This common situation corresponds to an azeotrope in vapor–
liquid equilibrium. At the azeotrope
F1az ¼ f1az ¼

ð1  r2 Þ
ð2  r1  r2 Þ

ð11:13Þ

Systems for which r1 > 1, r2 > 1 also form azeotropes, but have been rarely reported.
11.4

VARIATION OF COMPOSITION WITH CONVERSION

In general, F1 6¼ f1, that is, the composition of the copolymer formed at any instant will
differ from that of the monomer mixture from which it is being formed. Thus, as the
reaction proceeds, the unreacted monomer mixture will be depleted in the more reactive
monomer, and as the composition of the unreacted monomer changes, so will that of the
polymer being formed, in accordance with Equation 11.11.
Example 11.1 Draw curves of instantaneous copolymer composition, F1, versus monomer
composition, f1, for the following systems, and indicate the direction of composition drift as
the reaction proceeds in a batch reactor.
(a) Butadiene (1), styrene (2), 60  C; r1 ¼ 1.39, r2 ¼ 0.78.
(b) Vinyl acetate (1), styrene (2), 60  C; r1 ¼ 0.01, r2 ¼ 55.
(c) Maleic anhydride (1), isopropenyl acetate (2), 60  C; r1 ¼ 0.002, r2 ¼ 0.032.
Solution. Application of Equation 11.11 gives the plots in Figure 11.1. Note the system
(a) approximates ideal copolymerization, Case 4 above. In system (b), styrene is the
preferred monomer, regardless of the terminal radical; hence, the copolymer is largely
styrene until styrene monomer is nearly used up. System (c) approximates Case 1 above.

VARIATION OF COMPOSITION WITH CONVERSION

211

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7

(a)

F1

0.6
(c)

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

(b)

0.1
0
0

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
f1

FIGURE 11.1 Instantaneous copolymer composition (F1) versus monomer composition (f1).
(a) Butadiene (1), styrene (2) at 60  C; r1 ¼ 1.39, r2 ¼ 0.78; (b) Vinyl acetate (1), styrene (2), 60  C;
r1 ¼ 0.01, r2 ¼ 55; (c) Maleic anhydride (1), isopropenyl acetate (2), 60  C; r1 ¼ 0.002, r2 ¼ 0.032.
The direction of composition drift in a catch reactor is indicated by arrows (Example 11.1). The
dashed diagonal line represents Case 3, F1 ¼ f1, r1 ¼ r2 ¼ 1.

The direction of composition drift with conversion is indicated by arrows. Note that
system (c) forms an azeotrope at F1 ¼ f1 ¼ 0.493. To the left of the azeotrope, M1 is the
more reactive monomer (F1 > f1), but to the right, M2 is more reactive (F1 < f1). Therefore,
with an initial monomer composition f1,o < 0.493, F1 and f1 will decrease with conversion,
but if f1,o > 0.493, they will increase. If the initial monomer charge is exactly the azeotropic
composition, there will be no composition drift.
Consider a batch consisting of a total of M moles of monomer (M ¼ M1 þ M2). At time t,
the monomer has a composition f1. In the time interval dt, dM moles of monomer
polymerize to form copolymer with a composition F1. Therefore, at time t þ dt, there
are (M  dM) moles of monomer left whose composition has been changed to (f1  df1).
Writing a material balance on monomer 1 gives that the initial amount of monomer either
remains or is reacted (dM1):
ðM1 Þjt ¼ ðM1 Þjtþdt þ dM1

ð11:14aÞ

f1 M ¼ ðM  dMÞðf1  df1 Þ þ F1 dM

ð11:14bÞ

or

Expanding and neglecting second-order differentials gives
dM
df1
¼
F1  f1
M

ð11:15Þ

212

COPOLYMERIZATION

At the start of the reaction, there are Mo moles of monomer present with a composition f1,o,
and at some later time, there are M moles of monomer left with a composition f1.
Integrating between these limits gives
In

M
¼
MO

ð f1

df1
F
f10 1  f1

ð11:16Þ

This equation is the exact analog of the Rayleigh equation relating the amount and composition
of the still-pot liquid in a batch distillation, which may be familiar to some readers. By
choosing values for f1 and calculating the corresponding F1’s using Equation 11.11, the integral
may be evaluated to obtain a relation between the monomer composition and conversion
(X ¼ 1  (M/Mo)). An analytic solution to Equations 11.11 and 11.16 has been obtained (3). For
r1 6¼ 1, r2 6¼ 1 (if either is equal to 1, see the original reference):
 a  b 

M
f1
f2
f10  d g
¼
¼1X
f10
f20
M0
f1  d

ð11:17Þ

where
r2
1  r2
r1
b¼
1  r1
1  r1 r2
g ¼
ð1  r1 Þð1  r2 Þ
1  r2
d ¼
2  r1  r2

a¼

Knowing the monomer composition f1 as a function of conversion immediately gives the
instantaneous copolymer composition F1 as a function of conversion through Equation 11.11.
This is important to know because if there is a large variation in the composition of the
copolymer formed from the beginning of the reaction to high conversions, creating individual
polymer chains may be blocky in some segments and more random in others. This can result in
a wide variation in its properties.
Example 11.2 Discuss the possible influence of a wide variation in F1 on the transparency
of amorphous copolymers.
Solution. Amorphous, random copolymers of fairly uniform composition are normally
transparent because on a macroscopic scale, they are homogeneous systems in which the
discontinuities (groups of a few repeat units) are very much smaller than the wavelengths of
visible light. Because of the general mutual insolubility of two different polymers,
copolymers of widely differing F1 values may actually form a heterogeneous system in
which the discontinuities, globules of one phase in a matrix of another, will be larger than
the wavelength of light. Because of the compositional difference of the phases, they almost
certainly will differ in refractive index as well, leading to a system that scatters light and is
therefore not transparent.

VARIATION OF COMPOSITION WITH CONVERSION

(11.11)

213

F1

f1
(11.19)
(11.17)

FIGURE 11.2

〈F1〉

X

Schematic for calculation of copolymer compositions in a batch reaction.

In addition to the instantaneous copolymer composition F1, another quantity of interest is
hF1i, the cumulative composition of the copolymer that has been formed up to a particular
conversion. hF1i is exactly analogous to h
xn i, the cumulative number-average chain length
from Chapter 9. For a batch reactor, it is obtained through a material balance:
moles M1 charged ¼ moles M1 in copolymer þ moles M1 left in monomer
f10 M0 ¼ hF1 iðM0  MÞ þ f1 M

ð11:18Þ

Rearranging gives
hF1 i ¼

f10  f1 ðM=M0 Þ f10  f1 ð1  XÞ
¼
1  ðM=M0 Þ
X

ð11:19Þ

The distillation analog of this equation tells the well-educated bootlegger how much of
his 20-proof sour mash he must distill over to have 120-proof white lightning in the jug
under his condenser. Figure 11.2 illustrates the quantities defined in terms of the distillation
analogy. The “well-stirred, adiabatic bathtub” analogy developed in Section 9.10 to
xn i is equally applicable to the relation between
visualize the relation between 
xn and h
F1 and hF1i. Here, F1 is analogous to the temperature of the water entering the tub through
the spigot and hF1i to the temperature of the water in the bathtub.
Calculation procedures for a batch reactor are summarized in Figure 11.2 for a system of
known r1, r2, and f1,o.
Example 11.3 For the styrene–butadiene system of Example 11.1, plot instantaneous
copolymer composition F1 and cumulative composition hF1i versus conversion for a batch
reaction starting with a 50–50 (mol%) initial monomer charge.
Solution. As illustrated in the preceding diagram, calculations are facilitated by choosing f1
as the independent variable. From Example 11.1, butadiene is the more reactive monomer,
so as the reaction proceeds, the polymer will start out with a higher butadiene content and
become more enriched in styrene (monomer 2), and f1 will decrease from 0.5 to 0 as the
butadiene is used up. This is best calculated and graphed using a spreadsheet. For a given
value of f1, the conversion X is calculated from Equation 11.17 with a ¼ 3.55, b ¼ 3.57,
g ¼ 0.983, and d ¼ 1.29. F1 is obtained through Equation 11.11 as in Example 11.1. hF1i
is calculated from Equation 11.19 using the chosen f1 and the values of X obtained from
Equation 11.17.

214

COPOLYMERIZATION

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
F1
and
〈F1〉

0.6

〈F1〉

0.5
0.4

F1

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Conversion [1 – (M/M0)]

FIGURE 11.3 Instantaneous (F1) and cumulative (hF1i) copolymer composition versus conversion
for butadiene(1)-styrene(2), r1 ¼ 1.39, r2 ¼ 0.78, f1,o ¼ 0.50 (Example 11.3).

The results are plotted in Figure 11.3. Note that in this particular case, hF1i does not vary
much between 0% and 100% conversion, but F1 changes considerably, particularly at high
conversions (when only styrene is left in the reactor). Also note that hF1i at 100%
conversion must always equal f1,o. Because the entire initial monomer charge has been
converted to polymer, their compositions must be the same.

The preceding mathematical developments apply equally to the copolymers formed by
free-radical addition and anionic addition (though the numerical values of r1 and r2 would,
in general, be different for the same monomer pair in each of the modes).
However, the nature of the molecules formed is quite different. Recall that in freeradical addition, the average chain lifetime is an infinitesimal fraction of the reaction time,
while in anionic addition, the chains continue to grow throughout the reaction. Thus, in
free-radical addition, F1 is the composition of entire chains formed during a conversion
increment dX. hF1i represents the average composition of the mixture of chains of different
F1 formed up to conversion X. So, free-radical addition copolymers will have a wide
distribution of composition across all chains. In classic anionic addition, all the chains are
essentially identical. As f1 changes with conversion, we get a composition gradient in each
chain as the reaction proceeds. F1 is the composition of the portion of each chain formed
over a conversion increment dX and hF1i is the average composition of each chain (as well
as the entire copolymer) up to conversion X. Copolymerization with typical Ziegler–Natta
catalysts should be more like that in free-radical systems.
Example 11.4 Suggest three techniques for producing copolymers of fairly uniform
composition, that is, those in which F1 does not vary much.
Solution. Three possibilities are sketched in Figure 11.4. With a semibatch reactor, the more
reactive monomer is replenished as the reaction proceeds to maintain f1 (and, therefore, F1)

VARIATION OF COMPOSITION WITH CONVERSION

215

More reactive
monomer

(a)
Monomer
Feed

Separator

(b)

F1, f1 constant

Copolymer

Monomer

Feed
Reactor
Low conversion

Separator

(c)

Copolymer

FIGURE 11.4 Techniques for minimizing the spread of copolymer composition: (a) semibatch
reactor; (b) continuous stirred-tank reactor; (c) tubular reactor.

constant. A method for calculating the appropriate rate of addition has been described [4]. In a
continuous stirred tank (CSTR, or back mix) reactor, both f1 and F1 are constant with time. In
a continuous plug-flow reactor, the variation in F1 can be kept small by limiting the
conversion per pass in the reactor. Note that the last two techniques require facilities for
separating unreacted monomer from the polymer, and in most cases, recycling it.
Example 11.5 Consider the semibatch reactor in Figure 11.4a.
Let PðtÞ ¼ the total moles of both monomers in the polymer formed ðup to time tÞ and
AðtÞ ¼ the moles of the more reactive monomer added up to time t:
In this setup, if the relation between A(t) and P(t) is arranged properly, not only will the
copolymer be of uniform composition but also both monomers will be used up simultaneously. Obtain an expression that relates A(t) to P(t) and system constants.

216

COPOLYMERIZATION

Solution. First, make a total material balance on monomer: moles initially charged þ moles
added ¼ moles unreacted þ moles in copolymer:
M0 þ AðtÞ ¼ MðtÞ þ PðtÞ
Then, make a material balance on the more reactive monomer 1:
f10 M0 þ AðtÞ ¼ MðtÞf1 þ PðtÞF1
By eliminating M(t) between the two, keeping in mind that if F1 is to be constant, hF1i ¼ F1
and f1 ¼ f1,o (constant), we find
AðtÞ ¼

F1  f10
pðtÞ ¼ constant  PðtÞ
1  f10

Thus, the more reactive monomer is added in direct proportion to the amount of polymer
formed (in terms of moles monomer polymerized). In practice, the real trick is keeping
track of P(t). One approach is to make a dynamic heat balance on the reactor. The liberated
heat of polymerization is proportional to P(t).
11.5

COPOLYMERIZATION KINETICS

The problem of free-radical copolymerization kinetics is not nearly in such good shape. In
addition to the four propagation reactions, there are three possible termination reactions
(P1 þ P2, P1 þ P1, P2 þ P2), each with its own rate constant. A general rate equation has
been developed [5], but because of a lack of independent knowledge of the constants involved
and the mathematical complexity, it has not been used much. An approximate integrated
expression including first-order initiator decay has been presented [6]. It involves a single,
average termination rate constant. This “constant” would not be expected to remain constant
as composition varies. Nevertheless, there appears to be some experimental verification of the
relation. In certain instances where the compositions are not varying too much (e.g., in the
control of a continuously stirred tank reactor), simplification of Equations 11.6 and 11.7 to

 
1
dM1
¼ K 1 ½M1 

dt
V

ð11:20Þ


 
1
dM2
¼ K 2 ½M2 
dt
V

ð11:21Þ



where the “constants” K1 ¼ (k11 [P1] þ k21[P2]) and K2 ¼ (k12 [P1] þ k22[P2]) are
determined experimentally, may prove satisfactory.
11.6

PENULTIMATE EFFECTS AND CHARGE-TRANSFER COMPLEXES

There are certain cases in which the equations developed in Section 11.2 do not adequately
describe copolymerization. Two approaches have been taken to remedy these deficiencies:
invoking penultimate effects and postulating the formation of charge-transfer complexes.

PROBLEMS

217

In the former, the next-to-last (or penultimate) monomer in a growing chain also exerts an
influence on the addition of the next monomer molecule [7–10]. In the latter, a 1:1 complex
forms reversibly between electron-donating and electron-accepting comonomers (introducing an equilibrium constant to the analysis). This complex may then polymerize (from
either end––introducing four more reactivity ratios) with itself or with the uncomplexed
monomers.
The idea of complex formation is particularly helpful in explaining free-radical
copolymerizations in systems such as styrene–maleic anhydride. This system forms a
1:1 copolymer over most of the range of monomer compositions, and the addition of maleic
anhydride greatly enhances the rate of polymerization over that of pure styrene, despite the
fact that maleic anhydride will not homopolymerize at a noticeable rate. These observations are consistent with the formation of a strong, readily polymerized complex between
the monomers. The general equations to describe such copolymerizations have been
presented by Seiner and Litt [11] and applied in a number of special cases [12–15].

11.7

SUMMARY

The possibilities (and complexities) introduced by copolymerization are seemingly infinite. Monomers can be added at different ratios, but even so, the reactivity ratios must be
considered to evaluate the arrangement of the different repeat units in the polymer. Also,
the polymer chains that form early on in a reactor may have a different composition from
those formed later. The kinetics also become more and more difficult to accurately
describe. While copolymers are certainly interesting and valuable materials, this chapter
has only broken the surface in the analysis of these reactions. Further complexities can be
introduced––three or more different monomers, the addition of a crosslinking agent, and
step-growth polymers all require detailed analysis that is beyond the scope of this book.
PROBLEMS
Plot F1 and hF1i versus conversion in a batch reactor for systems (b) and (c) of
Example 11.1. Use f1,o ¼ 0.50.
(b) If you were going to produce a copolymer of uniform composition F1 ¼ hF1i
¼ 0.5 in a semibatch reactor (Figure 11.4a), which monomer would have to be
added to the reactor for systems (a), (b), and (c)?

1 (a)

2

Consider a copolymerization system in which r1 ¼ r2 ¼ 0.5. Sketch F1 and hF1i versus
conversion in a batch reactor for f1,o’s of 0.25, 0.50, and 0.75.

3

Crud Chemicals wishes to make a copolymer for beverage bottles using styrene (St)
for low cost and processability and acrylonitrile (AN) for its gas barrier (mainly to
CO2 and O2) properties. They want a–uniform composition of 75 wt% acrylonitrile
(component 1) and 25% styrene (component 2). This is 86%(1) and 14%(2) on a mole
basis. With more AN, the copolymer becomes difficult to process (recall from Chapter
3 that homopolyacrylonitrile, though linear, is not thermoplastic). With less AN, the
barrier properties suffer. For this system, r1 ¼ 0.040, r2 ¼ 0.40. Crud proposes to use
the semibatch technique of Figure 11.4a.

218

COPOLYMERIZATION

For a product that is to contain 100 total moles of monomer at complete conversion,
address the following.
(a) Which monomer must be added over the course of the reaction?
(b) How many moles of the monomer in (a) must be added over the course of the
reaction?
(c) Calculate the initial reactor charge.
(d) Explain why this is a difficult copolymer to make.
(e) Suppose Crud were just to dump 86 mol of AN and 14 mol of St into the reactor
and let it react to completion. Plot F1 and hF1i versus conversion. Why is not this
a good idea?
4

Most commercial copolymers of styrene and acrylonitrile, known as SAN, are about
75 wt% styrene and 25 wt% acrylonitrile. Compared to the polymer in Problem 11.3
(which is 75 wt% acrylonitrile, 25 wt% styrene), why is this copolymer much easier to
make at approximately uniform composition?

5

We wish to make an acrylonitrile (1)–styrene (2) copolymer (see Problem 11.3) by the
technique shown in Figure 11.4c. The range of instantaneous copolymer composition
must be limited to 0.40 < F1 < 0.60.
(a) What is the feed composition to the reactor?
(b) What should the maximum conversion be?
(c) What will hF1i be?

6

Crud Chemicals wishes to make a pilot-plant batch of block copolymer [M2]500–
[M1]500 by anionic polymerization. They start with 5.00 mol of M2 and an appropriate
quantity of n-BuLi in their reactor. They intend to let the M2 react to completion and
then add 5.00 mol of M1. Unfortunately, they get impatient (as often happens at Crud),
and dump in the 5.00 mol of M1 after only 2.50 mol of M2 have polymerized. For this
system, r1 ¼ 2.00, r2 ¼ 0.50.
Plot F1 and hF1i versus total moles monomer polymerized, from 0 to 10. Describe
the molecules produced. Make the usual assumptions of complete ionization: no
termination, instantaneous addition, and perfect mixing of reagents.

7

For a copolymerizing system of known r1, r2, and f1, obtain an expression for the
probability that a P1 will add M1 (rather than M).

8

Crud Chemicals is producing a copolymer of uniform composition in a semibatch
reactor, as illustrated in Figure 11.4a. For their system, r1 ¼ 2.0, r2 ¼ 0.5, and f1,o ¼ 0.5.
They adjust the rate of addition of the more reactive monomer according to the heat
evolution in the reactor. Normally, the system works quite well. One day, however, the
feed valve sticks full open at 50% conversion, suddenly dumping the remaining
monomer into the reactor. Nevertheless, they let the reaction go to completion. Plot
F1 and hF1i versus conversion (of all monomer) for this screwed-up reaction.

9

Consider the use of a CSTR to produce a copolymer of uniform composition,
Figure 11.4b. Here, f1,o is the composition of the gross feed (fresh feed þ recycle)
to the reactor and F1 and f1 are the steady-state compositions in the reactor and its
effluent stream.
(a) Obtain the expression that relates f1,o to conversion X in such a reactor.

REFERENCES

219

How is the recycle ratio (moles recycled per mole of fresh feed) related to X in
such a process, assuming complete separation and recycling of monomer?
(c) What must the mole fraction of monomer 1 be in the fresh feed to such a process,
again assuming complete separation and recycling of monomer?
(d) See Problem 11.3. Calculate the gross feed composition and the recycle ratio to
make that copolymer in a CSTR operating at 50% conversion.

(b)

10

Your boss calls you in to tell you that you are going to be in charge of implementing a
control system to produce a copolymer of uniform composition in a semibatch reactor
(Figure 11.4a). The reactor is fitted with a jacket to which steam can be fed to heat the
reactants to the desired reaction temperature (during which conversion is negligible).
Once the reaction has begun, the steam is shut off and replaced by cooling water, which
is throttled by a feedback control system to maintain the reactor temperature fairly
constant. What information would you need to know, and how would you go about
designing a control system to feed the more reactive monomer at the correct rate?

11

We have seen how the compositions in a copolymerizing system can be described in
terms of two parameters, r1 and r2. What does it take to describe the terpolymerization
of monomers M1, M2, and M3? If you are feeling particularly masochistic, you might
try to work out the terpolymerization equivalents of Equation 11.11.

12

Crud Chemicals is producing a copolymer of F1 ¼ 0.5 in a CSTR (Figure 11.4b). For
their system, r1 ¼ 2.0, r2 ¼ 0.5. Things are going along fine until the feed pump for
monomer 1 suddenly quits. It takes the maintenance people a couple of hours to get it
back on line. Sketch qualitatively F1 and hF1i versus time for the period from
immediately before the breakdown to the restoration of steady-state operation (well
after the repair).

REFERENCES
[1] Greenly, R.Z., Polymer Handbook, 3rd ed., J. Brandrup and E.H. Immergut (eds), Wiley, New
York, 1989, Chapter II, p. 153.
[2] Alfrey, T., Jr., and C.C. Price, J. Polym. Sci. 2, 101 (1947).
[3] Meyer, V.E. and G.G. Lowry, J. Polym. Sci. A3, 2843 (1965).
[4] Hanna, R.J., Ind. Eng. Chem. 49, 208 (1957).
[5] DeButts, E.H., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 72, 411 (1950).
[6] O’Driscoll, K.F. and R.S. Knorr, Macromolecules 1, 367 (1968).
[7] Merz, E.T., T. Alfrey, and G. Goldfinger, J. Polym. Sci. 1, 75 (1946).
[8] Barb, W.G., J. Polym. Sci. 11, 117 (1953).
[9] Ham, G.E., J. Polym. Sci. 54, 1 (1961).
[10] Ham, G.E., J. Polym. Sci. 61, 9 (1962).
[11] Seiner, J.A. and M. Litt, Macromolecules 4, 308 (1971).
[12] Litt, M. Macromolecules 4, 312 (1971).
[13] Litt, M. and J.A. Seiner, Macromolecules 4, 314 (1971).
[14] Litt, M. and J.A. Seiner, Macromolecules 4, 316 (1971).
[15] Spencer, H.G., J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Chem. Ed. 13, 1253 (1975).

CHAPTER 12

POLYMERIZATION PRACTICE

12.1

INTRODUCTION

As we have seen in the past few chapters, there are a number of reaction mechanisms used
to make polymers. Some reactor designs (semibatch and CSTRs) have been discussed as
ways to form uniform or well-characterized polymers and copolymers. This chapter covers
some of the important considerations with scaling up polymerizations, starting with bulk
polymerization, and takes into account how transport processes (heat and mass transfer)
may influence the design of polymerization reactors.
12.2

BULK POLYMERIZATION

The simplest and most direct method of converting monomer to polymer is known as bulk
or mass polymerization. A typical feed for a free-radical bulk polymerization might consist
of a liquid monomer, a monomer-soluble initiator, and perhaps a chain-transfer agent (no
solvent!).
As simple as this seems, some serious difficulties can be encountered, particularly in
free-radical bulk polymerizations. One of them is illustrated in Figure 12.1 [1], which
indicates the course of polymerization for methyl methacrylate by either bulk polymerization or solution polymerization using various concentrations of benzene, an inert solvent.
The reactions were carefully maintained at constant temperature. At low polymer concentrations, the conversion versus. time curves are described by Equation 9.19. As polymer
concentrations increase, however, a distinct acceleration of the rate of polymerization is
observed which does not conform to the classical kinetic scheme. This phenomenon is
known variously as autoacceleration, the gel effect, or the Tromsdorff effect.
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

220

BULK POLYMERIZATION

100

80%

60%
40%
20%
10%

100%
80
% Polymerization

221

60
40
20

0

500

1000
Time (min)

1500

FIGURE 12.1 Polymerization of methyl methacrylate at 50  C in the presence of benzoyl
peroxide (a thermal initiator) in bulk (100%) or solution polymerization using various concentrations
(10–80%) of monomer in benzene.

The reasons for this behavior lie in the difference between the propagation reaction (Eq.
9.3) and the termination steps (Eqs 9.4a and b), and the extremely high viscosities of the
concentrated polymer solutions (104 poise is a ballpark figure–compare with water, which
has a viscosity of 0.01 poise). The propagation reaction involves the approach of a small
monomer molecule to a growing chain end, whereas termination requires that the ends of
two growing chains get together. In bulk polymerizations, at high concentrations of
polymer, it becomes exceedingly difficult for the growing chain ends to drag their chains
through the entangled mass of dead polymer chains (eventually, the mass may vitrify,
meaning that the chains are stuck in place and cannot move around enough to terminate). It
is nowhere near as difficult for a monomer molecule to pass through the reaction mass,
though. Thus, the rate of the termination reaction is limited not by the nature of the
chemical reaction but by the rate at which the reactants can diffuse together, that is, it is
diffusion controlled. This lowers the effective termination rate constant kt, and since kt
appears in the denominator of Equation 9.13, the net effect is to increase the rate of
polymerization. At very high polymer concentrations and below the temperature at which
the chains become essentially immobile (or vitrified)—the Tg of the monomer-plasticized
polymer—even the propagation step is diffusion limited, hence the bulk polymerization
(100% monomer) curve levels off before reaching 100% conversion.
The difficulties of bulk polymerization are compounded by the inherent nature of the
reaction mass. Vinyl monomers have rather large exothermic heats of polymerization,
typically between –10 and –21 kcal/mol. Organic systems also have low heat capacities and
thermal conductivities, about half those of aqueous solutions. Thus, the temperature can
rise very quickly. To top it all off, the tremendous viscosities prevent effective convective
(mixing) heat transfer. As a result, the overall heat-transfer coefficients are very low,
making it difficult to remove the heat generated by the reaction. This raises the temperature,
further increasing the rate of reaction (see Example 9.2) which in turn increases the rate of
heat evolution, and can ultimately lead to disaster! To quote Schildknecht [2] on laboratory
bulk polymerizations, “If a complete rapid polymerization of a reactive monomer in large
bulk is attempted, it may lead to loss of the apparatus, the polymer or even the
experimenter.”

222

POLYMERIZATION PRACTICE

Example 12.1 The maximum possible temperature rise in a polymerizing batch may be
calculated by assuming that no heat is transferred from the system (adiabatic assumption).
Estimate the adiabatic temperature rise for the bulk polymerization of styrene, given that
DHp ¼ 16.4 kcal/mol and monomer molecular weight ¼ 104.
Solution. The polymerization of 1 mol of styrene liberates 16,400 cal (assuming complete
conversion). In the absence of heat transfer, all of this energy heats up the reaction mass.
The heat capacities of organic compounds are often difficult to find; this is even more
difficult here, as the properties of reaction mass change with conversion and probably also
with temperature. To a reasonable approximation, however, the heat capacity of most liquid
organic systems may be taken as 0.5 cal/g- C. Thus,
DTmax ¼ 16400

cal 1 mol
g C


 315  Cð!Þ
mol 104 g 0:5 cal

(The normal boiling point of styrene is 146  C.)

Problems of overheating in bulk polymerizations can be circumvented in several ways:
1. By keeping at least one dimension of the reaction mass small, permitting heat to be
conducted out. Poly(methyl methacrylate), PMMA, sheets are cast between glass
plates as a maximum thickness of 5 in or so.
2. By maintaining low reaction rates through low temperatures, low initiator concentrations, and initiators that have relatively large energies of activation. The polymerization times for the PMMA sheets are on the order of 30–100 h and the
temperatures are raised slowly as the monomer concentration drops. This approach
has obvious economic disadvantages.
3. By starting with a sirup instead of the pure monomer. A sirup is a solution of the
polymer in the monomer. It can be made in either of two ways: (a) by carrying the
monomer to partial conversion in a kettle, or (b) by dissolving preformed polymer in
monomer. Starting off with a sirup means that some of the conversion has already
been accomplished, cutting heat generation and monomer concentration in the final
polymerization. Since the density of a typical reaction mass increases on the order of
10–20% between 0% and 100% conversion in a bulk polymerization, the use of a
sirup has the added advantage of cutting shrinkage when casting a polymer.
4. By carrying out the reaction continuously, with a lot of heat-transfer surface per unit
conversion.
(Of course, a fifth option would be to use a solvent to aid in absorbing heat, but this is
covered in a later section of this chapter.)
Batch bulk polymerization is often used to make objects with a desired shape by
polymerizing in a mold. Examples are casting, potting, and encapsulation of electrical
components and impregnation of reinforcing agents followed by polymerization. Continuous bulk polymerization is used for the production of thermoplastics by both step-growth
and free-radical addition mechanisms. A continuous bulk process is outlined in Figure 12.2 [3]. Conversion is carried to about 40% in a stirred tank. The reaction mass then

BULK POLYMERIZATION

223

Condenser

Styrene

Vent

Prepolymerization
kettles

90 ºC.

90 ºC.
Monomer
to recycle
Condenser

100 ºC.
110 ºC.
110 ºC.
Monomer
to recycle

150 ºC.

Vacuum
jet

180 ºC.
200 ºC.
Cutter
Extruder

Strand
cooling

FIGURE 12.2 Continuous bulk polymerization of styrene. Reprinted by special permission from
Reference 3. Copyright  1962, by McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, NY 10036.

passes down a tower with the temperature increasing to keep the viscosity at a manageable
level and to drive up the conversion. The tower may be a simple gravity-flow device or it
may contain slowly rotating spiral blades that scrape the walls, promoting heat transfer and
conveying the reaction mass downward. The reaction mass is fed from the tower to a vented
extruder at better than 95% conversion. Some additional conversion takes place in the
extruder and a vacuum removes unreacted monomer, which is recycled. The extruded
strands of molten polymer are then water cooled and chopped to form the roughly
1
/8  1/8  1/8 in (3  3  3 mm) pellets, which are sold to processors as “molding powder.”
Sheets of PMMA are also continuously cast from sirup between polished sheet-metal belts.
Most bulk polymerizations are homogeneous. However, if the polymer is insoluble in its
monomer and precipitates as the reaction proceeds, the process is sometimes known as
heterogeneous bulk or precipitation polymerization. Two examples of such polymers are
polyacrylonitrile and poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC). The latter is produced by a heterogeneous bulk process, which allows control of particle size and porosity for optimum
plasticizer absorption [4]. Such heterogeneous polymerizations do not follow the kinetic
scheme developed in Chapter 9 for homogeneous reactions.
Ethylene and a few other monomers are in the gas phase at atmospheric conditions.
Thus, conventional low-density polyethylene (LDPE) is produced at pressures in the range
of 15,000–50,000 psi (1000–3400 atm), and temperatures of about 150–300  C [5]. These
pressures are well above the critical pressure of ethylene (731 psi), so the monomer can be
considered to be in the “fluid” phase. Depending on the temperature, pressure, and polymer
molecular weight, one or two phases may be present as the polymer forms. Peroxide and
azo free-radical initiators are used, as are small amounts of oxygen. Oxygen reacts with
monomer to form peroxide initiators in situ.
Two types of rectors are used for high-pressure ethylene polymerization: autoclaves and
tubular. The former are basically high-pressure CSTRs and the latter are continuous

224

POLYMERIZATION PRACTICE

Primary
compressor

Ethylene

Cooling
tower

Hyper
compressor

Ethylene

Catalyst
pump

Low-pressure
separator

High-pressure
separator
Extruder and
pelletizer

Separator
and dryer

FIGURE 12.3 Tubular low-density polyethylene process. Reprinted with permission from
CHEMTECH 13(4), 223 (1983). Copyright 1983 American Chemical Society.

plug-flow reactors. Figure 12.3 illustrates a high-pressure tubular process[6]. The reactors
are made of thick-walled pipe, typically from 1 in to 3 in in diameter and from 800 ft to
2500 ft long. They are also heat exchangers, with-heat transfer fluid circulating around the
pipe, first to heat the ethylene to reaction temperature and then to remove the large heat of
polymerization. Residence times are on the order of a minute, with single-pass conversions
of 20% or less. Production rates are in the range of 8–125 million lb/yr per reactor [5].
Separation of polymer from unreacted monomer is basically a matter of reducing the
pressure and allowing the monomer to flash off. Given the pressures involved, it is no
surprise that the compressors represent a significant fraction of the capital and operating
costs of these polymerization processes.
Bulk polymerization has several advantages:
1. Since only monomer, initiator, and perhaps chain-transfer agent are used, the purest
possible polymer is obtained. This can be important in electrical and optical applications.
2. Objects may be conveniently cast to shape. If the polymer is the one that is
crosslinked in the synthesis reaction, the only way of obtaining such objects short
of machining from larger blocks.

GAS-PHASE OLEFIN POLYMERIZATION

225

3. Bulk polymerization provides the greatest possible polymer yield per reactor
volume.
Among its disadvantages are the following:
1. It is often difficult to control.
2. To keep it under control, it may have to be run slowly, with the consequence of
economic disadvantages.
3. As indicated by Equations 9.13 and 9.27, it may be difficult to get both high rates and
high average chain lengths because of the opposing effects of [I].
4. It can be difficult to remove the last traces of unreacted monomer. After the reaction,
the remaining monomer is left dispersed throughout the reaction mass and must
diffuse to a surface to be evaporated. This is particularly important, for example, if
the monomer is toxic and, particularly, when the polymer is intended for use in foodcontact applications.

12.3

GAS-PHASE OLEFIN POLYMERIZATION

Gas-phase polyolefin processes based on Ziegler–Natta catalysts have undergone tremendous growth in the past decade. The popular UNIPOL fluidized-bed process is shown in
Figure 12.4 [6]. It typically operates at pressures in the range of 100–300 psi (7–20 atm) and at
temperatures under 100  C [6]. Monomer, catalyst particles, and hydrogen chain-transfer
agent (see Section 10.6) are fed to the fluidized-bed reactor. The upward-circulating
monomer suspends the growing polymer particles. The reactors have a characteristic bulge
at the top which is a disengaging section. It lowers the velocity of the circulating monomer,
keeping the growing polymer particles in the lower reaction zone. The monomer is circulated
through a heat exchanger to remove the heat of polymerization. Polymer is discharged from
the reactor in granular form, as powdered laundry detergent. It may be used as-is or extruded
and pelletized to form the more conventional molding powder.
Impact-modified polypropylene is produced by using two reactors in series [7]. The first
produces polypropylene particles, which are fed to the second reactor. A mixture of
gaseous ethylene and propylene monomers (but no additional catalyst) is fed to the second
reactor. The monomers diffuse to the still-active catalyst within the polypropylene particles
from the first reactor, where they copolymerize to form a core of ethylene–propylene
rubber within a polypropylene shell. This morphology greatly enhances the impact strength
over that of polypropylene alone.
Compared to older processes, a number of significant advantages are claimed for the
two-stage process above. With modern high-yield catalysts (10,000 g polymer/g catalyst),
there is no need to remove the catalyst from the product; thus a difficult and costly step is
eliminated. Modern catalysts also produce polypropylene with such a high isotactic content
that removal of an atactic fraction, a common step in older processes, is not required. With
low pressures, equipment and compression costs are low. No solvent is required. Separation
of unreacted monomer is simple. With different catalysts and minor variations in process
conditions, virtually the same equipment can be used to manufacture isotactic polypropylene (PP), high-density polyethylene (HDPE), and the so-called linear low-density
polyethylene (LLDPE). Overall, major advantages in capital and operating costs, energy

226

POLYMERIZATION PRACTICE

Cycle
compressor

Cycle
cooler

Fluid-bed
reactor
Purge

Catalyst
feeder

Product
discharge
system

Nitrogen

Ethylene

Comonomer

Granular
polyethylene

To blending
and storage

FIGURE 12.4 UNIPOL gas-phase polyolefin process. Reprinted with permission from
CHEMTECH 13(4), 225 (1983). Copyright 1983 American Chemical Society.

requirements, pollution, and superior product properties are cited by the licensors of
this process.
12.4

SOLUTION POLYMERIZATION

As mentioned earlier, heat transfer problems can be mitigated by using a solvent for
polymerization. A solvent can also overcome early polymer vitrification during the
reaction. Thus, the addition of an inert solvent to a bulk polymerization mass can minimize
many of the difficulties encountered in bulk systems (even though it also decreases the
amount of product formed per reactor size). As shown in Figure 12.1, the solvent reduces
the tendency toward autoacceleration in free-radical addition. The inert diluent adds its
heat capacity without contributing to the evolution of heat and it cuts the viscosity of the
reaction mass at any given conversion. In addition, the heat of polymerization may be
conveniently and efficiently removed by refluxing the solvent. Thus, the danger of runaway
reactions is minimized.

SOLUTION POLYMERIZATION

227

Example 12.2 Estimate the adiabatic temperature rise for the polymerization of a 20 wt%
solution of styrene in an inert organic solvent.
Solution. In 100 g of the reaction mass, there are 20 g of styrene, so the energy liberated on
its complete conversion to polymer is:
ð20 gÞ

ð1 molÞ ð16400 calÞ
¼ 3150 cal
104 g
mol

The adiabatic temperature rise is then:
DTmax ¼ ð3150 calÞ

ðg CÞ 1
 63  C
0:5 cal 100 g

The advantages of solution polymerization are:
1. Heat removal and control are easier than in bulk polymerization.
2. Since the reactions are more likely to follow known theoretical kinetic relations, the
design of reactor systems is facilitated.
3. For some applications (e.g., lacquers and paints), the desired polymer solution is
obtained directly from the reactor.
Among the disadvantages of solution polymerization are the following:
1. The use of a solvent lowers both rate and average chain length, which are
proportional to [M].
2. Large amounts of expensive, flammable, and perhaps toxic solvent are generally
required.
3. Separation of the polymer and recovery of the solvent require additional technology.
4. Removal of the last traces of the solvent and the monomer may be difficult, and
these may have impact on the properties of the polymer (i.e., act as plasticizing
agents).
5. Use of an inert solvent in the reaction mass lowers the yield per volume of the reactor.
Solution polymerizations are often used for the production of thermosetting condensation
polymers, which are carried to a conversion short of the gel point in the reactor. The
crosslinking is later completed in a mold. Such reactions may be carried out in a refluxing
organic solvent. The water of condensation is carried overhead along with the solvent
vapors. When the vapors are condensed, the water forms a second phase that is decanted
before the solvent is returned to the reactor. Not only does this drive the reaction toward
higher conversions but also the amount of water evolved provides a convenient measure of
conversion (see Example 8.1).
Ionic polymerizations as well as many Ziegler–Natta polymerizations [5] are almost
exclusively solution processes. They can be run under conditions such that the polymer
product stays in solution, as in the production of stereospecific rubbers. The crystalline

228

POLYMERIZATION PRACTICE

Monomer
Solvent

Solvent to
purification
and recycle

Monomer
recycle

Catalyst
slurry

MeOH
Reactor
~15% polymer
solution

Flush
tank

Aqucous

Catalyst
separation

Polymer
slurry

Decomposed
catalyst

FIGURE 12.5

Dryer

Polymer
crumb

Steam,
hot water

Ziegler–Natta solution polymerization process.

polymers polyethylene and isotactic polypropylene are commonly produced at temperatures
sufficiently below Tm so that the polymer product is a solid that grows on the catalyst particles
as in gas-phase polymerizations. Such processes are known as slurry polymerizations.
Figure 12.5 sketches a generic process utilizing a Ziegler–Natta catalyst system. Heat
removal from the reactor(s) may be accomplished by refluxing the solvent, cooling
jackets, external pumparound heat exchangers, or combinations of these. Catalyst
deactivation with methanol or acid and separation by filtration or centrifugation are
shown, although with modern high-yield catalysts these difficult and expensive steps can
be eliminated.
In the Ziegler–Natta solution polymerization process, solvent and unreacted monomer
are stripped with hot water and steam and recovered, leaving an aqueous polymer slurry,
which is then dried to form a “crumb.” With rubbers, the crumb is compacted and baled;
with plastics, it is normally extruded and pelletized. Reactor designs for these processes are
interesting and varied [8]. Most processes are continuous operations.
12.5

INTERFACIAL POLYCONDENSATION

Have you ever seen the example of forming nylon rope in a chemistry demonstration,
where the polymer magically appears between two immiscible phases? This is an example
of a variation of solution polymerization known as interfacial polycondensation. Besides
being used for a “wow” experiment in demonstrations, it has been used in the laboratory
for a long time [9], and is also applicable in industrial polymerizations. One monomer of a
condensation pair is dissolved in one solvent and the other member of the pair in another
solvent (note: this applies to AA and BB monomers, but does not work for AB-type
monomers). The two solvents must be insoluble in each other. The polymer is soluble in
neither and forms at the interface between them. One of the phases, generally, also
contains an agent that reacts with the molecule of condensation to drive the reaction to
completion.
An example of such a process is the preparation of nylon 6/10 from hexamethylene
diamine and sebacoyl chloride (the acid chloride form of sebacic acid):
O
O
H2N–冸 CH2 冹––6 NH2 + Cl–C–冸 CH2 冹–8– C–Cl

H
H O
O
–[ N–冸 CH2 冹–6– N–C–冸 CH2 冹–8– C]–x– + HCl

SUSPENSION POLYMERIZATION

229

Polymer fiber to spool

AA

AA

AA

AA
AA

AA

BB

BB

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

BB

BB BB

BB

BB

AA

Interface
BB

BB
BB

BB

BB

BB

BB

BB

FIGURE 12.6 Interfacial polymerization of a nylon. The upper (organic) phase contains sebacoyl
chloride (AA monomer) while the lower (aqueous) phase contains hexamethylene diamine (BB
monomer). The reaction occurs where the two phases meet.

The acid chloride is dissolved in, for example, CCl4, and the diamine in water, along with
some NaOH to soak up the HCl that splits out during the reaction (Figure 12.6). In the
classic “rope trick” demonstration, the aqueous layer is gently floated on top of the organic
layer in a beaker. The reactants diffuse to the interface, where they react rapidly to form a
polymer film. With care, the film can be withdrawn from the interface in the form of a
continuous, hollow strand that traps considerable liquid. New polymer forms at the
interface as the formed polymer is removed and replenished with fresh monomer on both
sides. Commercially, it is probably easier to simply stir the phases together.
A major advantage of this technique is that these reactions usually proceed very rapidly
at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, in contrast to the long times, high
temperature and vacuum pressures usually associated with polycondensations. Another
advantage of interfacial polymerizations for step-growth polymerizations is that the
stoichiometry of an AA, BB reaction matches at the interface, therefore, we can avoid
the problems noted in Chapter 8 with stoichiometric imbalance causing very low molecular
weight polymers to form. These must be balanced against the cost of preparing the special
monomers, such as the acid chloride above, and the need to separate and recycle solvents
and unreacted monomers.
12.6

SUSPENSION POLYMERIZATION

Under the discussion of bulk polymerization in Section 12.2, it was mentioned that one of
the ways of facilitating heat removal was to keep one dimension of the reaction mass small.
This is carried to its logical extreme in suspension polymerization by suspending the
monomer in the form of droplets 0.01–1 mm in diameter in an inert, nonsolvent liquid
(almost always water). To achieve these suspended droplets, some physical mixing energy
must be added (note that no surfactant is used here, so the droplets do not become an

230

POLYMERIZATION PRACTICE

emulsion). However, similar to emulsion polymerization, suspended droplets behave as
individual bulk reactors with dimensions small enough such that heat removal is not a
problem. The heat can easily be soaked up and removed from the low-viscosity, inert
suspension medium.
An important characteristic of these systems is that the suspensions are thermodynamically unstable, and must be maintained with agitation and suspending agents. A typical
feed might consist of
Monomer (water insoluble)
Initiator (monomer soluble)
Monomer phase
Chain-transfer agent (monomer soluble)
Water
Protective colloid
Suspending agent
Insoluble inorganic salt

Two types of suspending agent are used. A protective colloid is a water-soluble polymer
whose function is to increase the viscosity of the continuous water phase. This hydrodynamically hinders coalescence of the monomer droplets, but is inert with regard to the
polymerization. A finely divided insoluble inorganic salt such as MgCO3 may also be used.
It collects at the droplet–water interface by surface tension and prevents coalescence of the
droplets upon collision. Also, a pH buffer is sometimes used to1 help 1stability.
The monomer phase is suspended in the water at about a /2 to /4 monomer/water
volume ratio. The reactor is purged with nitrogen and heated to start the reaction. Once
underway, temperature control in the reactor is facilitated by the added heat capacity of the
water and the low viscosity of the reaction mass, essentially that of the continuous (water)
phase, allowing easy heat removal through a jacket heat exchanger.
The size of the product polymer beads depends on the strength of agitation, as well as the
nature of the monomer and suspending system. Between 20% and 70% conversion, agitation
is critical. Below this range, the organic phase is still fluid enough to redisperse and above it,
the particles are rigid enough to prevent agglomeration; but if agitation stops or weakens
between these limits, the sticky particles will coalesce or agglomerate in a large mass and
finish polymerization that way. Again quoting Schildknecht [10], “After such uncontrollable
polymerization is completed in an enormous lump, it may be necessary to resort to a
compressed air drill or other mining tool to salvage the polymerization equipment.”
Figure 12.7 [11] shows a typical suspension polymerization process. Since any flow
system is bound to have some relatively stagnant corners, it has been impractical to run
suspension polymerization continuously on a commercial scale. The stirred tank reactors
are usually jacketed, stainless, or glass-lined steel kettles of up to 50,000-gal capacity. The
polymer beads are filtered or centrifuged and water-washed to remove the protective
colloid and/or rinsed with a dilute acid to decompose the MgCO3. The beads are quite easy
to handle when wet, but tend to pick up a static charge when dry, making themselves cling
to each other and everything else. These beads can be molded directly, extruded and
chopped to form molding powder, or used as-is, for example, as ion-exchange resins or the
beads from which polystyrene foam cups and packing peanuts are made.
Ion-exchange resins are basically suspension beads of polystyrene crosslinked by
copolymerization with a few percent divinyl benzene (a crosslinking agent), which are
then chemically treated to provide the charged groups for functionality in separation and
purification. To reduce mass-transfer resistance in the ion-exchange process, an inert
solvent may be incorporated in the organic suspension phase. When polymerization is

SUSPENSION POLYMERIZATION

231

FIGURE 12.7 Suspension polymerization of methyl methacrylate. Excerpted by special permission from Reference 11. Copyright  1966 by McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, NY 10036.

complete, the solvent is removed, leaving a highly porous bead with a large internal surface
area (“macroreticular”). The foam beads used in coffee cups are made from linear
polystyrene containing an inert liquid blowing agent, usually pentane. Pentane may be
added to the monomer prior to polymerization, but more commonly, it is added to the
reactor after polymerization and is absorbed by the polystyrene beads. When exposed to
steam in a mold, the beads soften and are foamed and expanded by the volatilized blowing
agent to form the familiar cups and other foam items.
Commercially, suspension polymerization has been limited to the free-radical addition
of water-insoluble liquid monomers. With a volatile monomer such as vinyl chloride,
moderate pressures are required to maintain it in the liquid state. It is possible, however, to
perform inverse suspension polymerizations with a hydrophilic monomer or an aqueous
solution of a water-soluble monomer suspended in a hydrophobic continuous phase.
The major advantages of suspension polymerization then are as follows:
1. Easy heat removal and temperature control.
2. The polymer is obtained in a convenient, easily handled, and often directly useful
form.

232

POLYMERIZATION PRACTICE

The disadvantages include the following:
1. Low yield per reactor volume.
2. A somewhat less pure polymer than from bulk polymerization, since there are bound
to be remnants of the suspending agent(s) adsorbed on the particle surface.
3. The inability to run the process continuously; although if several batch reactors are
alternated, the process may be continuous from that point on.
4. It cannot be used to make condensation polymers or used for ionic or Ziegler–Natta
polymerizations.

12.7

EMULSION POLYMERIZATION

Emulsion polymerization was introduced while discussing some advanced polymerization
techniques in Chapter 9, but there are some important characteristics of emulsion
polymerization that merit discussion for industrial-scale processes. When the supply of
natural rubber from the East was cut off by the Japanese in World War II, the United States
was left without an essential material (tires for airplanes, especially at that time, needed
replacement after every few landings). The success of the Rubber Reserve Program in
developing a suitable synthetic substitute and the facilities to produce it in the necessary
quantities is one of the all-time outstanding accomplishments of chemists and engineers,
comparable to the Manhattan (atomic bomb) Project and the production of penicillin in its
significance at the time. The styrene–butadiene copolymer rubber GR-S (government
rubber-styrene) or SBR (styrene–butadiene rubber) as it is now called is still the most
important synthetic rubber, and much of it is still produced, along with a variety of other
polymers, by the emulsion polymerization process developed during the war.
The theory behind the emulsion reaction is discussed in Chapter 9. A generic
commercial process is outlined in Figure 12.8. The reactors are usually stainless or
glass-lined steel tanks, similar to those used for suspension polymerization. In contrast to
suspension polymerization, however, a proper emulsion is thermodynamically stable (due

Monomer
recycle
Water, soap Monomer
Initiator

Spray
dryer
Powder
product
Hot air
Latex product
Carbon black
Oil Emulsified
Master batching tanks

Latex
Reactors

Stream

Acid
Salts
Coagulation
Dryer
Water
washing

FIGURE 12.8

Schematic of an emulsion polymerization process.

Crumb

EMULSION POLYMERIZATION

233

to the surfactant or emulsifying agent), and therefore emulsion polymerizations can be run
continuously. Newer processes often have several continuous stirred-tank reactors
(CSTRs) in series.
The product of an emulsion polymerization is known as a latex—polymer particles on
the order of 0.05–0.15 mm stabilized by the surfactant. These latexes are often important
items of commerce in their own right (think of latex paints or white glue). This process can
also be modified slightly for microencapsulation purposes, with the polymer forming a
shell surrounding an inner fill material (these capsules are then used in controlled release
formulations in a number of fields).
Where the polymer must be mixed with other materials, the process of master batching
sometimes allows this to be done conveniently and uniformly. In rubber technology, carbon
black and oil are emulsified and mixed with the rubber latex and then the mixture is
coagulated together, giving a uniform and intimate dispersion of the additives in the rubber.
The increased recognition of possible adverse physiological effects of even small
amounts of residual monomer makes emulsion polymerization attractive in certain
applications. The extremely small size of the latex particles provides a very short diffusion
path for the removal of small molecules from the polymer, for example, by steam stripping,
permitting very low levels of residual monomer to be obtained.
For many applications, the solid polymer must be recovered from the latex. The simplest
method is spray drying (a process that produces a fine mist from the solution while
evaporating the solvent rapidly with hot air); but since no attempt is made to remove the
surfactant, the product is an extremely “dirty” polymer. A latex may be “creamed” by
adding a material such as acetone that is at least a partial solvent for the polymer. This
makes the particles sticky and causes some agglomeration. The latex is then coagulated by
adding an acid, usually sulfuric, which converts the surfactant from its sodium salt to its
insoluble hydrogen form, and/or by adding an electrolyte salt, which disrupts the
stabilizing double layer on the particles, causing them to agglomerate through electrostatic
attraction. The former method leaves much insoluble material adsorbed on the particle
surfaces, but in some applications, this may even be beneficial. For example, fatty acids
from the surfactant act as lubricants in tire manufacturing. The coagulated polymer
“crumb” is then washed, dried, and either baled or processed further.
As with suspension polymerization, commercial emulsion polymerization has pretty much
been restricted to the free-radical solution addition of water-insoluble, liquid monomers (with
volatile monomers such as butadiene and vinyl chloride, moderate pressures are required to
keep them in the liquid phase). Inverse emulsion polymerizations, with a hydrophilic
monomer phase dispersed in a continuous hydrophobic base are, however, possible.
The advantages of emulsion polymerization are as follows:
1. Ease of control. The viscosity of the reaction mass is much less than that of a true
solution of comparable polymer concentration, the water also adds its heat capacity
to improve temperature control, and the reaction mass may be refluxed.
2. It is possible to obtain both high rates of polymerization and high average chain
lengths by using high surfactant and low initiator concentrations.
3. The latex product is often directly valuable or aids in obtaining uniform compounds
through master batching.
4. The small size of the latex particles allows the attainment of low residual monomer
levels.

234

POLYMERIZATION PRACTICE

The disadvantages include the following:
1. It is difficult to get a pure polymer product. The tremendous surface area of the tiny
particles provides plenty of room for adsorbed impurities. This includes water
attracted by residual surfactant, traces of which can cause problems in certain
applications.
2. Considerable technology and expense is required to recover the solid polymer.
3. The water in the reaction mass lowers the yield per reactor volume.
4. It cannot be used to make condensation polymers or used for ionic or Ziegler–Natta
polymerizations.
12.8

SUMMARY

Much as any industrial chemical plant must consider numerous factors beyond the
chemistry of a reaction, industrial polymerization processes require adequate control of
temperature (especially to remove large exothermic heats of reaction), provide mixing, and
involve appropriate separation techniques. Bulk polymerizations offer pure polymers in a
reaction vessel, allowing the greatest possible yield per reactor volume. However, disadvantages such as vitrification, the Tromsdorff effect, and extraction of unreacted
monomer have led to other polymerization methods, including solution, suspension, and
emulsion polymerization.
PROBLEMS
1

What difficulties would you foresee in carrying out anionic or Ziegler–Natta polymerizations by suspension or emulsion processes?

2

Suspension polymerization is routinely used to produce ion-exchange beads from
copolymers of styrene and divinyl benzene. Why is it not used to make polymer for
ion-exchange membranes of similar composition?

3

Emulsion polymerization is used extensively for the production of synthetic rubbers
but suspension polymerization is not. Why?

4 (a)

Autoacceleration is common in the free-radical polymerization of vinyl monomers. Why is it not observed in the anionic addition polymerization of the same
monomers?
(b) What do you think would be a distinguishing molecular characteristic of
polymer formed in a strongly autoaccelerated reaction, and why?

5

The semibatch method of producing copolymers of uniform composition
(Figure 11.4a) can be used in conjunction with all modes of polymerization but
suspension. Why?

6

Describe a suspension-polymerization formulation for the production of poly(acrylic
acid). This monomer is similar to acetic acid in most properties.

7

The 100% monomer curve in Figure 12.1 levels off at about 90% conversion. What
would you do to push the conversion to 99%?

REFERENCES

235

8

Why do you suppose that such high pressures are needed for LDPE production? They
are not needed for the other free-radical reactions we have seen.

9

To be useful in paint formulations, a polymer must form a continuous film on the
surface to which it is applied.
(a) What key properties must the polymer phase in a latex-paint formulation have?
(b) One of the major advantages of latex paints over the older oil-based paints is easy
cleanup with water. You may have noticed, however, that if you let your brushes
sit around too long before rinsing them, you can no longer get the paint out with
water. Why?

10

In the two-reactor, impact-modified polypropylene process described in Section 12.3,
it was noted that no new catalyst was introduced to the second reactor. Suppose it was.
How would that alter the product?

11

Crud Chemicals is preparing a batch of glyptal resin by refluxing 2 kmol of glycerin
and 3 kmol of phthalic anhydride (see Example 8.2) in toluene. The water of
condensation is decanted before returning the toluene to the reactor for the next
batch. Calculate the maximum liters of water they can collect before shutting down
the reaction.

REFERENCES
[1] Schulz and Harborth, G. Makromol. Chem. 1, 106 (1947).
[2] Schildknecht, C.E., Polymer Processes, Interscience, New York, 1956, p. 38.
[3] Wohl, M.H., Chem. Eng. August 1, 1962, p. 60.
[4] Thomas, J.C., Soc. Plast. Eng. J. 23 (10), 61 (1967).
[5] Albright, L.F., Processes for Major Addition-Type Plastics and Their Monomers, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1974.
[6] Karol, F.J., CHEMTECH 12 (7), 222 (1983).
[7] Haggin, J., Chem. Eng. News March 31, 1986, p. 15; Bisio, A., Chem. Eng. Progr. 85 (5), 76
(1989).
[8] Gerrens, H., CHEMTECH 12 (7), 434 (1982).
[9] Morgan, P.W., Soc. Plast. Eng. J. 15 (6), 485 (1959).
[10] Schildknecht, C.E., Polymer Processes, Interscience, New York, 1956, p. 94.
[11] Guccione, E., Chem. Eng. June 6, 1966, p. 138.

PART III

POLYMER PROPERTIES

This part of the book moves from the chemical structure and reactions used to form
polymers to their physical properties. Some of the material in this section may be familiar
to one who has studied the mechanics of materials, but it is worth delving deeper into
polymers and discover some of their unusual characteristics (viscoelasticity, for one).
Topics that are addressed here include mechanical strength, flexibility, polymer responses
to compression, stretching and shear forces, and the equipment used to test these properties.
One chapter is devoted to mathematical models to describe viscoelastic behavior (using
combinations of so-called springs and dashpots) to approximate the complex response of
polymers to stresses that include both elastic stretch (which is particularly useful in the
waistbands of underwear) and viscous deformation (which is very useful in automobile
bumpers to dissipate the energy of a collision).

Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen
Ó 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

237

CHAPTER 13

RUBBER ELASTICITY

13.1

INTRODUCTION

Natural and synthetic rubbers possess some interesting, unique, and useful mechanical
properties. No other materials are capable of reversible extension of 600–700%. No other
materials exhibit an increase in strength (elastic modulus) with increasing temperature. It
was recognized long ago that vulcanization (crosslinking with sulfur) was necessary for
rubber deformation to be completely reversible. We now know that this is a result of the
crosslinks that prevent the bulk slippage of the polymer chains past one another,
eliminating flow (irrecoverable deformation). More recently, this function of the covalent
crosslinks has been achieved using physical (instead of chemical) means and using rigid
domains (either glassy or crystalline) within some linear polymers, such as poly(vinyl
alcohol). Thus, when a stress is applied to a sample of crosslinked rubber, equilibrium is
fairly rapidly established. Once at equilibrium, the properties of the rubber can be
described by thermodynamics.
13.2

THERMODYNAMICS OF ELASTICITY

Consider an element of material with dimensions a  b  c, as sketched in Figure 13.1.
Applying the first law of thermodynamics to this system yields:
dU ¼ dQ  dW

ð13:1Þ

where dU is the change in the system’s internal energy, and dQ and dW are the heat and
work exchanged between the system and its surroundings as the system undergoes a
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

239

240

RUBBER ELASTICITY

b

c
f

f

a

(b)

(a)

dl
P

t

P

(b-db)

P

P

(a-da)

dg

c)

(c-d

t
P
(c)

(d)

P

FIGURE 13.1 Types of mechanical deformation: (a) unstressed (b) uniaxial tension (c) pure shear,
and (d) isotropic compression.

differential change. (We have adopted the convention here that work done by the system on
the surroundings is positive.)
We will consider three types of mechanical work.
1. Work done by a uniaxial tensile force, f:
dWðtensileÞ ¼ fdl

ð13:2Þ

where dl is the differential change in the system’s length arising from the application
of the force f. This is the fundamental definition of work. The negative sign arises
from the need to reconcile the mechanical convention of treating a tensile force
(which does work on the system) as positive with the thermodynamic convention
above.
2. Work done by a shear stress, t:
dWðshearÞ ¼ ðforceÞðdistanceÞ ¼ ðtbcÞðadgÞ ¼ tVdg

ð13:3Þ

where g is the shear strain (Figure 13.1c) and V ¼ abc ¼ the system volume.
3. Work done by an isotopic (evenly applied on all sides) pressure in changing the
volume:
dWðpressureÞ ¼ PðcbÞda þ PðacÞdb þ PðabÞdc ¼ PdV

ð13:4Þ

Note that no negative sign is needed here. A positive pressure causes a decrease in the
volume (negative dV) and does work on the system.
If the deformation process is assumed to occur reversibly (in a thermodynamic sense), then:
dQ ¼ TdS
where S is the system’s entropy.

ð13:5Þ

THERMODYNAMICS OF ELASTICITY

241

Combining the preceding five equations gives a general relation for the change of
internal energy of an element of material undergoing a differential deformation:
dU ¼ TdS  PdV þ fdl þ Vtdg

ð13:6Þ

Now, let us consider three individual types of deformation.
1. Uniaxial Tension at Constant Volume and Temperature: Under these conditions,
dV ¼ t ¼ 0. Dividing the remaining terms in Equation 13.6 by dl, restricting to
constant T and V, and solving for f gives:
 
 
qU
qS
T
f ¼
ql T; V
ql T; V

ð13:7Þ

2. Pure Shear at Constant Volume and Temperature: Here, dV ¼ f ¼ 0. Dividing the
remaining terms in Equation 13.6 by dg, restricting to constant T and V, and solving
for t gives:
 
 
1 qU
T qS

t¼
V qg T; V V qg T; V

ð13:8Þ

3. Only Isotropic Compression at Constant Temperature:
 
 
qU
qS
P¼
þT
qV r
qV T

ð13:9Þ

It is very difficult to carry out tensile experiments at constant volume to obtain the partial
derivatives in Equation 13.7. Most experimental tests are carried out at constant pressure
(atmospheric), and in general, there is a change in volume with tensile straining.
Fortunately, Poisson’s ratio is approximately 0.5 for rubbers, so this change in volume
is small, and also Equation 13.7 is approximately valid for tensile deformation at constant
pressure. For precise work, the hydrostatic pressure must be varied to maintain V constant
or theoretical corrections applied to the constant-pressure data to obtain the constantvolume coefficients [1,2]. In pure shear experiments, V should be constant and Equation 13.8 should be valid.
13.2.1

Types of Elasticity

Equations 13.7–13.9 reveal that there are energy (the first term on the right) and entropy
(the second term on the right) contributions to the tensile force, shear stress, or isotropic
pressure. In polymers, energy elasticity represents the storage of energy resulting from the
rotation of bonds (Figure 6.4) and the straining of bond angles and lengths from their
equilibrium values. Compare this behavior with other inelastic solids (metals, ceramics);
because polymers deform, they are able to store energy temporarily due to any of the three
cases above. Interestingly, energy elasticity is almost entirely intramolecular (within single
polymer chains) in origin, that is, there is no change in the energy interaction between
different polymer chains with deformation [2].

242

RUBBER ELASTICITY

Increase
temperature

Increase
tensile stress

High S

FIGURE 13.2

Low S

The effects of stress and temperature on chain configurations.

Entropy elasticity is caused due to decrease in entropy upon straining. This can be
visualized by considering a single polymer molecule subjected to a tensile stress. In an
unstressed state, the molecule is free to adopt an extremely large number of random,
“balled-up” configurations (Figure 13.2a) switching from one to another through rotation
about the bonds. Now imagine the molecule to be stretched out under the application of a
tensile force (Figure 13.2b). It is obvious that there are far fewer configurational
possibilities, and the more it is stretched, the fewer there are. Now, S ¼ k ln W, where
k is the Boltzmann’s constant and W is the number of configurational possibilities, so
stretching decreases the entropy (increases the molecular order). Raising the temperature
has precisely the opposite effect. The added thermal energy of the chain segments
increases the intensity of their lateral vibrations, favoring a return to the more random or
higher entropy state. This tends to pull the extended chain ends together, giving rise to a
retractive force.
It should be obvious from the discussion above that to exhibit significant entropy
elasticity, the material must be above its glass transition temperature and cannot have
appreciable amounts of crystallinity.
13.2.2

The “Ideal” Rubber

To demonstrate the “ideal” rubber, let us start with a gas subjected to an isotropic pressure,
where the energy term in Equation 13.9 arises from the change in the intermolecular forces with
volume and the entropy term arises from the increased space (and therefore greater “disorder”)
the molecules gain with increased volume. In an ideal gas, there are no intermolecular
forces, (qU/qV)T ¼ 0. By analogy, in an ideal rubber, (qU/ql)T,V ¼ (qU/qg)T,V ¼ 0 and

THERMODYNAMICS OF ELASTICITY

243

20,000
18,000
16,000

Stress (g/cm2)

14,000
12,000
f
10,000
fs
8000
6000
4000
2000
fu
0
-2000

0

50

100

150 200 250
Elongation (%)

300

350

400

FIGURE 13.3 Energy (fV) and entropy (fS) contributions to tensile stress in natural rubber at 20  C.
Reprinted from Anthony et al. [3] Copyright 1942 by the American Chemical Society. Reprinted by
permission of the copyright owner.

elasticity arises only from entropy effects. For many gases around room temperature and above,
and around atmospheric pressure and below, (qU/qV)T < T (qS/qV)T, the ideal gas law is a good
approximation. Similarly, as illustrated in Figure 13.3 [3], under some circumstances, (qU/ql)T,
V < T(qS/ql)T,V for rubbers and they behave just as ideal rubbers.
13.2.3

Effects of Temperature at Constant Force

Now let us consider what happens to the length of a piece of rubber when its temperature is
changed while a weight is suspended from it, that is, when it is maintained at a constant
tensile force, assuming constant volume (an approximation, in the usual constant-pressure
experiment), dU ¼ TdS þ f dl. Solving for dl, dividing by dT, and restricting to constant f as
well as V gives


ql
qT



 
 
1 qU
T qS
¼

f qT f ; v f qT f ; v
f; v

ð13:10Þ

As before, the first term on the right represents energy elasticity and the second
represents entropy elasticity. Since internal energy increases with temperature, the partial
derivative in the energy term is positive, as is f. The energy term, therefore, causes an
increase in length with temperature (positive contribution to (ql/qT)f,V). This is the normal
thermal expansion observed in all materials (ceramics, metals, glasses, etc.), reflecting the
increase in the average distance between atomic centers with temperature. All factors in

244

RUBBER ELASTICITY

the entropy term are positive, however, and since it is preceded by a negative sign, it gives
rise to a decrease in length with increasing temperature. In rubbers, where the entropy
effect overwhelms the normal thermal expansion, this is what is actually observed. In all
other materials, where the structural units are confined to a single arrangement (e.g., the
atoms in a crystal lattice cannot readily interchange), the entropy term is small. To
visualize this, consider Figure 13.2 and the large amount of entropy gained by balling up a
polymer chain.
The magnitude of the entropy contraction in rubbers is typically much greater than the
thermal expansion of other materials. An ordinary rubber band will contract an inch or so
when heated to 300  F under stress, while the expansion of a piece of metal of similar
length over a similar temperature range would not be noticeable without a microscope.
According to a well-known metallurgist [4], “Polymers are all entropy.”
13.2.4

Effects of Temperature at Constant Length

It is interesting to consider what happens to the force in a piece of rubber when it is heated
while stretched to a constant length. The exact thermodynamic Maxwell relation
 
 
qS
qf
¼
ð13:11aÞ

ql T; V
qT l; V
can be used to describe approximately the usual experiment conducted at constant pressure.
A better approximation to the constant pressure experiment is
 
 
qS
qf


ql T; V
qT P; a
where a ¼ l/lo is the extension ratio, the ratio of stretched to unstretched length at a
particular temperature. Combining Equations 13.11a and 13.7 gives


qf
qT



 
f
1 qU
¼ 
T T ql T; V
l; V

ð13:12Þ

Now, both f and T are positive, so the first term on the right causes the force to increase with
temperature, a result of the greater thermal agitation (tendency toward higher entropy) of
the extended chains. The partial derivative in the second term is usually (but not always!)
positive, as energy is stored like a spring when it is extended. With the negative sign in
front, this term predicts a relaxation of the tensile force with increasing temperature. Again,
the second term reflects the ordinary thermal expansion obtained with all materials, but in
rubbers, at reasonably large values of f, it is overshadowed by the first (entropy) term and
the force increases with temperature. For an ideal rubber, (qU/ql)T,V ¼ 0, and integration of
Equation 13.12 at constant volume yields
f ¼ ðconstantÞT

ðideal rubberÞ

ð13:13Þ

This is analogous to the linearity between P and T in an ideal gas at constant V. These
observations are confirmed in Figure 13.4. When the polymer is not stretched much
(e.g., the 3% elongation line), the polymer softens as the temperature is raised.

THERMODYNAMICS OF ELASTICITY

245

25,000

370%
20,000

319%
15,000

255%
194%

10,000

Stress (Gr/cm2)

125%
72%
5000

4000
38%
3000
22%
2000

13%
1000
6%
3%
0

10

20

30 40 50 60
Temperature (ºC)

70

80

90

FIGURE 13.4 Force versus temperature in natural rubber maintained at constant extension
(% relative to length at 20  C) [3]. Copyright 1942 by the American Chemical Society. Reprinted
by permission of the copyright owner.

This negative slope at low elongations arises from the predominance of thermal
expansion when elongation, and hence f, is low. Note that there is an intermediate
elongation, the thermoelastic inversion point (at approximately 13% elongation in
Figure 13.4), at which force is essentially independent of temperature, where thermal
expansion and entropy contraction balance. In the upper portions of the graph, the
highly elongated samples require more stress to maintain greater elongation ratios, and
the stress goes up appreciably with temperature, as the entropic terms dominate over
thermal expansion, causing an even greater force of the polymer trying to coil back
from its extended state.

246

RUBBER ELASTICITY

13.3

STATISTICS OF IDEAL RUBBER ELASTICITY [1,2,5]

A typical rubber consists of long chains connected by short crosslinks every few hundred
carbon atoms. The chain segments between crosslinks are known as network chains.
 c, the molecular weight between crosslinks.) The
(These segments are characterized by M
change in entropy upon stretching a sample containing N moles of network chains is
S  S0 ¼ NRln

W
W0

ð13:14Þ

where the subscript 0 refers to the unstretched state, W is the number of configurations
available to the N moles of network chains, and R is the gas constant. By statistically
evaluating the W’s, it is possible to show that for constant-volume stretching,
" 
#
 
1
l 2
l0
3
þ2
S  S0 ¼  NR
l
2
l0
1
¼  NRða2 þ 2a1  3Þ
2

ð13:15Þ

where a ¼ l/lo is the extension ratio. (Newer theories give somewhat different results [2],
but this is adequate for our purposes.)
For an ideal rubber, in which the tensile force is given by
f ¼ T

 
qS
ql T; V

ðideal rubberÞ

ð13:16Þ

differentiation of Equation 13.15 and insertion into Equation 13.16 yields
f ¼

NRT
ða  a2 Þ
l0

ð13:17Þ

Also,
mass rV rl0 A0 rlA
N¼  ¼  ¼  ¼ 
Mc
Mc
Mc
Mc

ð13:18Þ

 c is the number-average molecular weight of the chain segments between
where M
consecutive crosslinks, r is the density, and A is the cross-sectional area of the sample
(since the volume change in stretching a piece of rubber is negligible, Aolo ¼ Al). Therefore,
f ¼

rA0 RT
2
 c ða  a Þ
M

ð13:19Þ

The engineering tensile stress, se, is defined as the tensile force divided by the initial crosssectional area of the sample Ao and is, therefore,
se 

f
rRT
¼  ða  a2 Þ
A0
Mc

ð13:20Þ

247

STATISTICS OF IDEAL RUBBER ELASTICITY

and the true tensile stress st, the tensile force over the actual area A at length l, is
st 

f
rRT
¼  ða2  a1 Þ
Mc
A

ð13:21Þ

l  l0
¼a1
l0

ð13:22Þ

Since the tensile strain « is
«¼

the slope of the true stress–strain curve (which gives the tangent Young’s modulus) is

E¼

qst
q«


T


¼

qst
ql

 
T

ql
q«



rRT
¼  ð2a þ a2 Þ
Mc
T

ð13:23Þ

and the initial modulus (as a ! 1) for an ideal rubber becomes
3rRT
EðinitialÞ ¼ 
Mc

ð13:24Þ

The modulus is representative of the strength of a material (or how much resistance the
material will give) when a force (axial tension, shear stress) is applied.
Equations 13.19–13.24 point out two important concepts: (1) the force (or modulus) in
an ideal rubber sample held at a particular strain increases in proportion to the absolute
temperature (in agreement with Eq. 13.13), and (2) the force is inversely proportional to the
molecular weight of the chain segments between crosslinks. Thus, increased crosslinking,
 c , is an effective means of stiffening a rubber. Equation 13.24 is often used
which reduces M

to obtain M c from mechanical tests and thereby evaluate the efficiency of various
crosslinking procedures.
Even noncrosslinked polymers exhibit rubbery behavior above their Tg values for
limited periods of time. This is due to mechanical (physical) entanglements acting as
 c then represents the average length of the chain segments between
temporary crosslinks; M
those entanglements.
When compared with experimental data, Equation 13.19 does a reasonably good job in
compression but begins to fail at extension ratios a greater than about 1.5, where the
experimental force becomes greater than predicted. There are a number of reasons for this.
First, Equation 13.15 is based on the assumption of a Gaussian distribution of network
chains. This assumption fails at high elongations, and it is also in error if crosslinks are
formed when chains are in a strained configuration. Second, it does not take into account
the presence of chain end segments, which do not contribute to the support of stress. Third,
some rubbers (natural, in particular) begin to crystallize as a result of chain orientation at
high elongations. (Orientation reduces DSm and raises Tm above the test temperature. See
Example 6.6.) This causes the stress–strain curve to shoot up markedly. Some theoretical
modifications to the theory are available that improve on the accuracy of these equations,
for example, Mark and Erman [2] address the issues of non-Gaussian distribution of chain
length and factor at the chain ends.
It is also important to keep in mind that in practice, rubbers are rarely used in the form of
pure polymer. They are almost always reinforced with carbon black, and often contain

248

RUBBER ELASTICITY

other fillers, plasticizing, and extending oils, etc., all of which influence the stress–strain
properties, and are not considered in the theories discussed here.
13.4

SUMMARY

Rubbery materials are a class of crosslinked polymers that are characterized by their
response to mechanical stimuli (stretching, compression, etc.). This chapter explained the
unusual behavior of polymers through the (often) competing combination of internal
energy and entropic energy. The thermodynamic analysis used in this chapter served to
develop equations to quantifiably predict the behavior of rubbers in stress environments
 c . This chapter served as an
and even use rubber elasticity experiments to estimate M
introduction to the thermodynamic basis for rubber elasticity; the practical implications of
this behavior will be discussed in detail in the beginning of Chapter 15. While this chapter
introduced the behavior of purely elastic materials, the next chapter covers the opposite
extreme of viscous polymer melts (and solutions). These two concepts will be brought
together in Chapter 15 on viscoelastic materials, which have features of both elastic solid
rubbers and viscous liquid melts. Other texts are available for more in-depth study of rubber
elasticity [1,2].
PROBLEMS
1

Recall the definition of enthalpy: H  U þ PV. Write the enthalpy analogs of Equations 13.7 and 13.8 for experiments carried out at constant pressure. Does it makes you
wonder why we bother with internal energy at all?

2

Derive Equation 13.11a. Hints: Start with Equation 13.6, with dV ¼ dg ¼ 0. Make use
of the definition of Helmholtz free energy: A  U  TS. Remember that the second
mixed partial derivatives of thermodynamic state functions are independent of the order
in which you take them.

3

The following data were obtained in a classroom demonstration in which a rubber band
with inked-on gage marks was looped over the hook of a spring balance:
f, lb

l, cm

0
0.33
0.54
0.79
1.10
1.36
1.66
1.89
2.20
2.68
3.07

2.42
2.80
3.08
3.58
3.97
4.70
5.60
6.42
7.28
8.45
9.30

REFERENCES

249

The initial cross section of the rubber band measured 1 mm  6 mm. The density of the
rubber was probably around 1 g/cm3 and the temperature was 25  C (remember, this is
not rocket science). Assume that the band is made of natural rubber, [C5H8]x . How well
does Equation 13.19 ﬁt these data? Estimate the average number of repeating units
 c.
between crosslinks, 
xc and M
4

Show that the fraction of the energy contribution (fU) to the total force (f) in a uniaxially
stretched rubber is given by
 


fU
T qf
qlnðf =TÞ
¼1
¼ T
f
f qT l; V
qT
l; V

5

Use the equation of Problem 13.4 and the data in Figure 13.4 to calculate the fractional
energy contribution to the force in the material.

6

Sketch qualitatively the expected variation in fU/f with degree of crosslinking in a
rubber.

7

It was mentioned that (qU/ql)T,V is not always positive (although it is still smaller than
the entropy term). For example, it is negative for linear polyethylene, at least for low
elongations. Why? Hint: Recall Figure 6.4.

8

This chapter has emphasized the differences between the behavior of polymers and
nonpolymers in uniaxial tension. How would you expect them to be compare in
isotropic compression? Why?

9

Repeat Problem 13.6 for rubbers in isotropic compression.

REFERENCES
[1] Flory, P.J., Principles of Polymer Chemistry, Cornell UP, Ithaca, NY, 1953, Chapter 11.
[2] Mark, J.E. and Erman, B. Rubberlike Elasticity: A Molecular Primer, Wiley, New York, 1988.
[3] Anthony, R.L., R.H. Caston, and E. Guth, J. Phys. Chem. 46, 826 (1942).
[4] Paxton, H.W., personal communication.
[5] Tobolsky, A.V., Properties and Structure of Polymers, Wiley, New York, 1960, Chapter 2.

CHAPTER 14

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW
AND THE RHEOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR
OF POLYMERS

14.1

INTRODUCTION

In contrast to Chapter 13, where purely elastic materials were described, the opposite end
of the spectrum is purely viscous materials, more commonly known as liquids, which for
polymers means they are either molten or dissolved in a good solvent. Rheology is the
science of the deformation and flow of materials, particularly of polymers that can melt
and flow, as long as they are not crosslinked or degrade at temperatures below Tm. This
area has been much-studied because polymers exhibit such interesting, unusual, and
difficult-to-describe (at least from the standpoint of traditional materials) deformation
behavior. The simple and traditional linear engineering models, Newton’s law (for flow)
and Hooke’s law (for elasticity), often just are not reasonable approximations for the
behavior of polymers. Not only are the elastic and viscous properties of polymer melts and
solutions usually nonlinear but they also exhibit a combination of viscous and elastic
response, the relative magnitudes of which depend on the temperature and the time scale
of the experiment. Thus, we have a new term viscoelasticity. The viscoelastic response is
dramatically illustrated by Silly Putty (a silicone polymer). When bounced (stressed
rapidly), it is highly elastic, recovering most of the potential energy it had before being
dropped. If stuck on the wall (stressed over a long time period), however, it will slowly
flow down the wall, albeit with a high viscosity, and will show little tendency to recover
any deformation. We limit ourselves here to one- and two-dimensional deformations. A
detailed three-dimensional treatment of rheology is beyond the scope of this book. Several
excellent resources are available [1–8].

Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

250

BASIC DEFINITIONS

14.2

251

BASIC DEFINITIONS

We begin our treatment of rheology with a discussion of purely viscous flow. For our
purposes, this will be defined as a deformation process in which all the applied mechanical
energy is nonrecoverably dissipated as heat in the material through molecular friction (i.e.,
no elastic response at all). This process is known as viscous energy dissipation. Purely
viscous flow is in most cases a good approximation for dilute polymer solutions and often
for concentrated solutions and melts, where the stress on the material is not changing too
rapidly, that is, where steady-state flow is approached.
The viscosity of a material expresses its resistance to flow (compare a low viscosity
fluid, such as water, with higher viscosity fluids, such as most oils, honey, or polymer
melts). It is defined quantitatively in terms of two basic parameters: the shear stress t and
the shear rate g_ (more correctly referred to as the rate of shear straining). Polymers can
really complicate analysis of flow due to the high molecular weights and entanglements
between (or even within) polymer chains. Shear stress and shear rate are defined in
Figure 14.1 Consider a point in a laminar flow field (Figure 14.1). A rectangular coordinate
system is established with the x axis (sometimes designated the one coordinate direction)
in the direction of flow and the y axis (the two direction) perpendicular to surfaces of
constant fluid velocity, that is, parallel to the velocity gradient (the velocity at position y is
u, and due to the shear force F placed on the Cartesian element in Figure 14.1, the velocity
at position y þ dy is u þ du). This causes the material to deform. The z axis (three or neutral
direction) is mutually perpendicular to the others. This is known as simple shearing flow. It
is one example of a viscometric flow, a flow field in which the velocity and its gradient are
everywhere perpendicular, with a third neutral direction mutually perpendicular to the
others (see Bird et al. [2] for a more rigorous definition). Other examples of viscometric

y

dx
A

F

u + du
F

u

dy

x

z

FIGURE 14.1

Cartesian element to define shear stress and shear rate.

252

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW AND THE RHEOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS

flows are given later in this chapter and in Chapter 15. Viscometric flows can often be
treated analytically. Fortunately, many laminar-flow situations encountered in practice
either are viscometric flows or at least can be reasonably approximated by them.
As a fluid moves over a stationary surface, the friction at the surface slows down the flow
so that the linear velocity of the fluid changes with distance from the surface. Thus, if we
assume a fluid layer at a position y away from a surface moves with a velocity u ¼ dx/dt
in the x direction, the layer at y þ dy has a velocity of u þ du. The displacement gradient,
dx/dy, is known as the shear strain, and is given by the symbol _g:
g¼

dx
¼ shear strain
dy

ðdimensionlessÞ

ð14:1Þ

The time rate of change of shear strain, g_ (or d _g/dt, the dot is Newton’s notation for the
time derivative), is the so-called shear rate. Since the order in which the mixed second
derivative is taken is immaterial (note that by sticking to two dimensions, we can write total
rather than partial derivatives), then
 
 
d
d dx
d dx
du
¼
¼ ðtime1 Þ
ð14:2Þ
g_ ¼ ðgÞ ¼
dt
dt dy
dy dt
dy
Thus, in simple shearing flow, the shear rate is identical to the velocity gradient, du/dy.
(This is not the case for all viscometric flows.)
The shear stress is the force (in the direction of flow) per unit area normal to the y axis:


Fðin x directionÞ
force
ð14:3Þ
tyx ¼
A ðnormal to y directionÞ length2
The subscript yx will henceforth be dropped unless specifically needed.
Earlier in determining the viscosity-average molecular weights, we introduced the
viscosity, h. Viscosity is actually defined as the ratio of shear stress to shear rate:
h  t=g_

ð14:4Þ

Traditionally, most rheological work has been done in the CGS system, with force in dynes,
mass in grams, length in centimeters, and time in seconds. In this system, the unit of viscosity
is dyne-s/cm2, or poise (P); centipoise is also commonly used since the viscosity of water is
around 1 cp (for comparison, many polymer melts have viscosities of 10,000 P or higher).
Since the early days, SI units have become de rigueur, with force in Newtons (N) and length in
meters. SI unit for viscosities is in Ns/m2 ¼ Pas (1 Pas ¼ 10 P ¼ 1000 cp). Equations here
will be written with either of these systems in mind. When using the English system of pound
force, pound mass, feet, and seconds, each stress or pressure as written here must be multiplied
by the dimensional constant gc ¼ 32.2 ftlbm /lb fs2, and viscosities are in lbm/fts.
14.3 RELATIONS BETWEEN SHEAR FORCE AND SHEAR RATE:
FLOW CURVES
When most materials are subjected to a constant shear rate, g_ at a fixed temperature, a
corresponding steady-state value of shear stress, t, is soon established. A constant shear
stress can also be applied, with the steady-state shear rate found based on the input t. The

RELATIONS BETWEEN SHEAR FORCE AND SHEAR RATE: FLOW CURVES

253

D
N

D
N

N

B-P

P

t
N

(log) t

P

Slopes
N=1
D=1
P=1

P

0

0

g•
(a)

(log) g•
(b)

FIGURE 14.2 Types of flow curves: (a) arithmetic and (b) logarithmic. N, Newtonian; P,
pseudoplastic; B-P, Bingham plastic (infinitely pseudoplastic); D, dilatant.

steady-state relation between shear stress and shear rate at constant temperature is known
as a flow curve.
Newton’s “law” of viscosity states that the shear stress is linearly proportional to the
shear rate, with the proportionality constant being the viscosity, h:
t ¼ hg_

ð14:5aÞ

Fluids that follow this hypothesis are termed Newtonian. The hypothesis holds quite
well for many nonpolymer fluids, such as gases and water, and solvents, such as toluene.
This type of flow behavior would be expected for small, relatively symmetrical molecules,
where the structure and/or orientation do not change with the intensity of shearing
(particularly those fluids that do not get entangled in one another, as polymers do).
An arithmetic flow curve (t versus _g) for a Newtonian fluid is a straight line through the
origin with a slope h (Figure 14.2a). Because t and g_ often cover very wide ranges, it is
usually preferable to plot them on log–log coordinates. Taking logarithms of both sides of
Equation 14.5a yields
log t ¼ log h þ 1log g_

ð14:5bÞ

Hence, a log–log plot of t versus _g, a logarithmic flow curve, will be a line of slope one for
a Newtonian fluid, with the viscosity found by the log1 of the y-axis intercept (Figure 14.2b).
Unfortunately, many fluids do not obey Newton’s hypothesis. Both dilatant (shearthickening) and pseudoplastic (shear-thinning) fluids have been observed (Figure 14.2). On
log–log coordinates, dilatant flow curves have a slope greater than 1 and pseudoplastics
have a slope less than 1. Dilatant behavior is somewhat uncommon but has been reported
for certain slurries and implies an increased resistance to flow with intensified shearing.
Polymer melts and solutions are invariably pseudoplastic, that is, their resistance to flow
decreases with the intensity of shearing.
For non-Newtonian fluids, since t is not directly proportional to _g, the viscosity is not
constant with the shear rate. Plots (or equations) giving h as a function of g_ (or t) are an
equivalent method of representing a material’s steady-state viscous shearing properties.
Knowledge of the relation between any two of the three variables (t, h, and _g) completely
defines the steady-state viscous shearing behavior, since they are related by Equation 14.4.

254

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW AND THE RHEOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS

14.4

TIME-DEPENDENT FLOW BEHAVIOR

The types of non-Newtonian flow just described, although shear dependent, are time
independent. As long as a constant shear rate is maintained, the same shear stress or
viscosity will be observed at steady state. Some fluids, however, exhibit reversible timedependent properties. When sheared at a constant rate or stress, the viscosity of a
thixotropic fluid will decrease over a period of time (Figure 14.3), implying a
progressive breakdown of structure. If the shearing is stopped for a while, the structure
reforms, and the experiment may be duplicated. A classic example is ketchup (which
contains natural polymers as thickening agents); it splashes all over after a period of
vigorous tapping. Thixotropic behavior is important in the paint industry, where smooth,
even application with brush or roller is required, but it is desirable for the paint on the
surface to “set up” to avoid drips and runs after application. Thixotropic behavior is
fairly common in polymer solutions and melts and is primarily due to chains disentangling and becoming aligned in the direction of flow over time, making it a bit easier to
flow (lower viscosity). The opposite sort of behavior is manifested by rheopectic fluids,
for example, certain drilling muds used by the petroleum industry. When subjected to
continuously increasing and then decreasing shearing, time-dependent fluids give flow
curves as in Figure 14.4.
Once in a while, polymer systems will falsely appear to be thixotropic or rheopectic.
Careful checking (including before and after molecular weight determinations) invariably
shows that the phenomenon is not reversible and is due to degradation or crosslinking of the
polymer when in the viscometer for long periods of time, particularly at elevated
temperatures. Other transient time-dependent effects in polymers are due to elasticity,
and will be considered later, but for chemically stable polymer melts or solutions, the
steady-state viscous properties are time independent. We treat only such systems from
here on.

Shearing
stopped

Shearing
resumed

ctic

ope

Rhe

h
Thi

Time
independent

xot

rop

ic

Time

FIGURE 14.3 Viscosity behavior of time-dependent fluids.

POLYMER MELTS AND SOLUTIONS

255

Thixotropic

t

Rheopectic

g•

FIGURE 14.4 Flow curves for time-dependent fluids under continuously increasing and then
decreasing shear.

14.5

POLYMER MELTS AND SOLUTIONS

When the flow properties of polymer melts and solutions can be measured over a wide
enough range of shearing, the logarithmic flow curves appear as in Figure 14.5. It is
generally observed that:
1. at low shear rates (or low stresses), a “lower Newtonian” region is reached with a socalled zero-shear viscosity, ho,

FIGURE 14.5

Generalized flow properties of polymer melts and solutions.

256

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW AND THE RHEOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS

2. over several decades of intermediate shear stress, the material is pseudoplasatic, and
3. at very high shear rates, an “upper Newtonian” region, with viscosity h1 is attained.
This behavior can be rationalized in terms of molecular structure. At low shear, the
randomizing effect of the thermal motion of the chain segments overcomes any
tendency toward molecular alignment in the shear field. The molecules are thus in
their most random and highly entangled state, and have their greatest resistance to
slippage (flow). As the shear is increased, the molecules will begin to untangle and
align in the shear field, reducing their resistance to slippage past one another. Under
severe shearing, they will be pretty much completely untangled and aligned, and will
reach a state of minimum resistance to flow. This is illustrated schematically in
Figure 14.5.
Intense shearing eventually leads to extensive breakage of main-chain bonds, that is,
mechanical degradation. Furthermore, differentiation of Equation 13.3 with respect to time
reveals that the rate of viscous energy dissipation per unit volume is equal to t g_ It thus
becomes exceedingly difficult to maintain the temperature constant under intense shearing,
therefore good data that illustrate the upper-Newtonian region are relatively rare, particularly for polymer melts.
But what happens to the highly oriented molecules when the shear is removed? The
randomizing effect of thermal energy tends to return them to their low-shear configurations, giving rise to an elastic retardation.
Some actual flow curves for polymer melts are shown in Figure 14.6 [9]. The data cover
only a portion of the general range described above, because very few instruments are
capable of obtaining data over the entire range. The polyisobutylene data cover the
transition from lower Newtonian to pseudoplastic regions but the polyethylene data are
confined to the pseudoplastic region. No trace of the upper Newtonian region is seen for
either material at the shear rates investigated.
14.6

QUANTITATIVE REPRESENTATION OF FLOW BEHAVIOR

To handle non-Newtonian flow analytically, it is desirable to have a mathematical
expression relating t, h, and _g, as Newton’s law does for Newtonian fluids. A wide
variety of such constitutive relations has been proposed, both theoretical and empirical [2,5,10]. All appear to fit at least some experimental data over a limited range of shear
rates, but, in general, the more adjustable parameters in the equation, the better fit it
provides. (There is an old saying that with six adjustable constants, you can draw an
elephant, and with a seventh, make his trunk wave.) The mathematical complexity of the
equations increases greatly with the number of parameters, soon outstripping the available
data to establish the parameters and making the equations impractical for engineering
calculations.
The traditional engineering model for purely viscous non-Newtonian flow is the socalled power law:
t ¼ Kð _gÞn

ð14:6aÞ

This is a two-parameter model, the adjustable parameters being the consistency
K and the flow index n. As written above, the dimensions of K depend on the

257

QUANTITATIVE REPRESENTATION OF FLOW BEHAVIOR

log t (dynes/cm2)

6

5

T

4

3
-4

=

F
0º
20
F
0º
F
25
0º
F
30
0º
F F
35
º
0º
40 450 0 ºF
50

-3

-2

Small rotor
Large rotor

log g• (/s)
(a)

-1

0

1

6

0 ºF
30
=
T

log t (dynes/cm2)

5

ºF
0 ºF 400 0 ºF
35
45
0 ºF
50

4
Small rotor
Large rotor
3
-2

FIGURE 14.6
polyethylene.

-1

0

log g (/s)
(b)
•

1

2

3

Flow curves for polymer melts [9]: (a) L-80 polyisobutylene; and (b) low-density

magnitude of n (dimensionless), so if you are a dimensional purist, the power law may
be written as
t ¼ K jg_ jn1 g_

ð14:6bÞ

This way, K has the usual viscosity units.
On log t versus log g_ coordinates, a power-law fluid is represented by a straight line with
slope n. Thus, for n ¼ 1, it reduces to Newton’s law; for n < 1, the fluid is
pseudoplastic, and for n > 1, the fluid is dilatant. The power law can reasonably
approximate only portions of actual flow curves over one or two decades of shear rate
(see Figure 14.6), but it does so with fair mathematical simplicity and has been adequate for

258

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW AND THE RHEOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS

many engineering purposes. Many useful relations have been obtained simply by replacing
Newton’s law with the power law in the usual fluid-dynamic equations.
The Carreau model [2] is a four-parameter model that can represent the features of the
general flow curve in Figure 14.5. Here,
h  h1
¼ ½1 þ ðlc _gÞ2 ðn1Þ=2
h 0  h1

ð14:7Þ

The parameter lc is a time constant or characteristic time, and ho and h1 represent the
viscosity, h, whenðlc _gÞ2 « 1 and ðlc _gÞ2 » 1, respectively. For mid-range values of ðlc _gÞ2 ,
the equation generates a power-law region with a log–log slope of n1. This model has
been quite successful in fitting data for polymer melts and solutions over at least three or
four decades of shear rate.
Not long ago, an equation with four constants would have been deemed excessively
complex for engineering calculations, but the computer does not mind a bit. Actually, in
many practical applications, the shear rates don not get high enough to approach the upperNewtonian region, and a truncated (three-parameter) form of the Carreau equation, with
h1 ¼ 0, is adequate.
The (much) “modified Cross” model [11] has seen increasing application in recent
years:
hðT; _gÞ ¼

h0 ðTÞ
1 þ ½Ch0 ðTÞ _g1n

ð14:8Þ

This is a three-parameter model, with the constant C having the dimensions of a
reciprocal modulus (area/force). The product Cho has dimensions of time and may be
thought of as a time constant or characteristic time. At low shear rates, h ! ho, and at high
shear rates, it gives a power-law region with a log–log slope of n1.
The great virtue of this model is that unlike other models, it explicitly incorporates the
dependence of viscosity on temperature as well as shear rate through the temperature
dependence of the zero-shear viscosity (to be discussed shortly). Equation 14.8 is written
to emphasize that point. This makes it particularly well suited for nonisothermal flow
calculations.
As will be illustrated later, certain important calculations (e.g., the determination of
velocity profiles and flow rates in tubes) are facilitated by flow equations that are explicit in
t, that is, have the form g_ ¼ _g(t) or h ¼ h(t). The power law can be written in either form.
Some of the equations not given here are in or can be put in one of these forms.
Unfortunately, they tend not to fit data as well as the Carreau and modified Cross equations,
neither of which can be made explicit in t. This has led to the practice of fitting flow data
with polynomials such as
log g_ ¼ a0 þ a1 ðlog tÞ1 þ a2 ðlog tÞ2 þ . . .

ð14:9aÞ

log h ¼ b0 þ b1 ðlog tÞ1 þ b2 ðlog tÞ2 þ . . .

ð14:9bÞ

or

where ai and bi are functions of temperature.

TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF FLOW PROPERTIES

259

In principle, this is applicable and can give good fits, but in practice, two cautions are in
order. First, it is easy to get carried away and include more terms in the equation than are
justified by the data. This leads to the fitting of experimental scatter. Second, great care
must be exercised when extrapolating the equations beyond the range of data used to
determine them. Uncritical extrapolation can lead to artifacts such as shear stresses that
decrease with increasing shear rate and negative viscosities, that violate both common
sense and the second law of thermodynamics. These problems are less likely to arise when
an established flow equation is used.

14.7

TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF FLOW PROPERTIES

If you consider the number of processes that use molten polymers (e.g., injection-molded
CDs), it is obvious that the temperature dependence of flow properties must be understood.
The temperature dependence of the zero-shear viscosity can often be represented by the
relation:
h0 ðTÞ ¼ AeE=RT

ð14:10Þ

where E is the activation energy for viscous flow.
The ho’s from Ref. 12 are plotted according to Equation 14.10 in Figure 14.7. The
fit is quite good. The slope is E/2.303R, from which E ¼ 11.4 kcal/mol. Thus,
the combination of Equations 14.10 and 14.8 does a pretty good job of describing
both the shear rate and the temperature dependence of the viscosity, at least for
these data.

109

viscosity, ηo (Poise)

108

107

106

105
0.0018

0.0028
1/ T (/K)

FIGURE 14.7 Temperature dependence of zero-shear viscosity. Zero-shear viscosities from
modified Cross fits to the L-80 polyisobutylene data from Figure 14.6a [9] and plotted according
to Equation 14.10.

260

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW AND THE RHEOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS

Example 14.1 What must be the temperature to reduce the 100  C zero-shear viscosity of
L-80 PIB by an order of magntiude?
Solution. The temperature dependence of zero-shear viscosity is given by Equation 14.11.
Therefore, between temperatures T1 and T2,
 

h02 expðE=RT2 Þ
E 1
1
¼ exp
¼

h01 expðE=RT1 Þ
R T2 T1
Here, T1 ¼ 100  C ¼ 373 K and ho2/ho1 ¼ 0.1. With R ¼ 1.99 cal/molK and the activation energy given above, solving for T2 gives
T2 ¼ 439 K ¼ 166  C

Temperature is therefore an effective means of controlling melt viscosity in processing
operations, but two drawbacks must be kept in mind: (1) it takes time and costs money to
put in and take out thermal energy, and (2) excessive temperature can lead to
degradation of the polymer.
The famous Williams–Landell–Ferry (WLF) equation [13] is useful for describing the
temperature dependence of several linear mechanical properties of polymers (see Chapter
16). For the zero-shear viscosity, it may be written as

log 10

h0 ðTÞ
C1 ðT  T * Þ
¼
h0 ðT * Þ C2 þ ðT  T * Þ

ð14:11Þ

where T* is a reference temperature. If the reference temperature is chosen as the glass
transition temperature, T* ¼ Tg, the “universal” constants C1 ¼ 17.44 and C2 ¼ 51.6
(with T’s in K) give a rough fit for a wide variety of polymers. The WLF equation is most
useful in this form because Tg is extensively tabulated for many polymers [14]. Better
fits can be obtained by using constants specific to the polymer, but these constants are
less readily available. It has also been suggested that the fit can be improved by using
C1 ¼ 8.86 and C2 ¼ 101.6, with T* adjusted to fit specific data, if available. When this is
done, T* generally turns out to be Tg þ (50  5)  C [2]. Whichever constants are used,
application of the WLF equation should be limited to the range Tg < T < Tg þ 100  C.
The WLF Equation 14.11 can also be used in conjunction with Equation 14.8. However,
Equation 14.10 often gives a better fit of ho versus T data than Equation 14.11.
The modified Cross equation gives the temperature dependence of viscosity at finite
shear rates. With other equations, the temperature dependence of all the constants would
have to be known. Another approach has used an equation that is independent of any model
for the flow curve. Since the viscosity is a function of temperature and shear stress or
shear rate:
h ¼ f ðt; TÞ

0

or h ¼ f ð _g; TÞ

TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF FLOW PROPERTIES

261

By analogy to Equation 14.10, these functions are approximated by


Et
RT

h ¼ B exp


Eg_
RT

h ¼ C exp


ðat constant tÞ

ð14:12aÞ

ðat constant _gÞ

ð14:12bÞ



where Et is the activation energy for flow at constant shear stress and Eg_ is the activation
energy for flow at constant shear rate. Figure 14.8 shows plots of log g_ versus 1/T at
constant t for L-80 polyisobutylene and low-density polyethylene (taking data for a
constant t from Figure 14.6) [9]. Since each of these data sets can fit to a straight line, the
shear rate, g_ follows Arrhenius behavior for PIB and PE. Since g_ ¼ t/h, the slope of these
lines is Et/2.303R.

1

2
t=

1

195
,70
0d
yne
s/c
m2

t=

0

0
33
4,0
00

dy
ne
s/c
m

2

-1

14

log g• (/s)

,74

0

43

,00

0
-2

-1

-3

-2

22
40
P.I.B. (low mol. wt.)
P.E. (low density)
-3

0

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

-4

1/ T • 103 (/ºR)

FIGURE 14.8

Temperature dependence of shear rate at constant shear stress [9].

262

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW AND THE RHEOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS

It will be left as an end-of-chapter exercise to show that Et > E _g. In the limit t ! 0,
g_ ! 0 for all Newtonian fluids, Et ¼ Eg_ ¼ E (see note1).

14.8

INFLUENCE OF MOLECULAR WEIGHT ON FLOW PROPERTIES

It should be of no surprise that the larger the polymer, the more viscous the solution (after
all, that is one way we used to estimate molecular weights in Chapter 5). It has long been
known that the molecular weight has a strong influence on both the melt and the solution
viscosities of polymers. Experiments show that the viscosity can be scaled to the weightaverage molecular weights through
h0 / M w

1

for M w < M wc

ð14:13aÞ

3:4

for M w > M wc

ð14:13bÞ

h0 / M w

where M wc is a critical average molecular weight, thought to be the point at which molecular
entanglements begin to dominate the rate of slippage of the molecules. It depends on the
temperature and polymer type, but most commercial polymers are well above M wc.
Equation 14.13a quantitatively holds for just about all polymer melts. The addition of a
low molecular weight solvent, of course, cuts down the entanglements and raises M wc.
Equation 7.15 suggests that entanglements set in when the dimensionless product of
intrinsic viscosity and concentration (the Berry number) exceeds one, [h]c >1. Thus, if you
know [h] for your polymer in the solvent, you can get an idea of the concentration above
which Equation 14.13b should be used (and the viscosity rises much more sharply!). In
practice, even moderately concentrated (say 25% or more) polymer solutions have
viscosities proportional to M w3.4, provided that M w is in the range of commercial
importance.
Example 14.2 Obtain an approximate equation that relates M wc to concentration and the
MHS constants (Equation 5.18) for polymer solutions.
Solution. First, we assume that entanglements begin when the Berry number, [h]c, equals 1.
Because all we are after here is a rough estimate, we can assume that M w ¼ M v (see
Example 5.4). Thus,

M wc 

1
Kc

1=a

As the shear rate is increased, the number of entanglements between chains is reduced,
and as expected, the dependence of viscosity on molecular weight decreases (Figure 14.9).

1
Note: The variable E in this chapter refers to the activation energy for flow (which is important when studying
rheology). However, the modulus of elasticity, which is a measure of mechanical strength, is also represented by E,
as first introduced in Chapter 13.

THE EFFECTS OF PRESSURE ON VISCOSITY

263

Slop
e

= 3.
4

ho

Increasing g•

log h

h∞
pe

=1

Slo

–
Mwc
–
log Mn

FIGURE 14.9

The effect of molecular weight on viscosity.

Example 14.3 By what percentage must M w be changed to cut the zero-shear viscosity, ho,
in half?
Solution. From Equation 14.13b,

3:4
h02
M w2
¼
h01
M
 w11=3:4
M w2
h02
¼
¼ ð1=2Þ1=3:4 ¼ 0:816
h01
M w1
% change ¼ 100





M w2  M w1
M w2
¼ 100
 1 ¼ 18:4%
M w1
M w1

Thus, it takes only an 18% decrease in chain length to halve the zero-shear melt
viscosity. Although things will not be quite so dramatic at high shear rates, this illustrates
the importance of controlling molecular weight during synthesis to achieve a product with
the desired processing properties.
14.9

THE EFFECTS OF PRESSURE ON VISCOSITY

For all fluids, viscosity increases with increasing pressure, as the free volume and, hence,
the ease of molecular slippage is decreased. With liquids, including polymer melts, because

264

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW AND THE RHEOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS

of their relative incompressibility, the effect becomes noticeable only at fairly high
pressures (hundreds of atmospheres). Nevertheless, such pressures are reached in certain
processes (e.g., injection molding) and in certain types of capillary viscometers (later in
this chapter). Available data have been fit by
h0 ðPÞ ¼ aebP

ð14:14Þ

where a and b are constants. Equation 14.14 may be combined with Equation 14.10 to give
an equation that expresses both the temperature and pressure dependence of zero-shear
viscosity:


E
þ bP
h0 ðT; PÞ ¼ Dexp
RT

ð14:15Þ

Presumably, Equation 14.15 could be used in conjunction with Equation 14.8 to express
viscosity as a function of _g, T, and P, but for pressure, there is as yet little experimental
justification for this.
Carley [15] has critically reviewed work on polymer melts and concludes that pressure
effects are of minor significance in most processing situations, provided the temperature is
not too close to a transition. High pressures raise both Tg and Tm slightly, and, of course, the
viscosity shoots up tremendously as either is approached.

14.10

VISCOUS ENERGY DISSIPATION

Regardless of the viscometric technique, determination of the true, isothermal flow
properties at high shear rates can be complicated by high rates of viscous energy
dissipation, which make them hard to maintain isothermal conditions. If we divide both
sides of Equation 13.3 by V dt, we see that the rate of viscous energy dissipation per unit
volume E_ is
E_ ¼ t g_ ¼ hg_ 2

ð14:16Þ

Example 14.4 Obtain an expression for the adiabatic rate of temperature rise in a polymer
sample subjected to a shear stress t and shear rate _g.
Solution. In the absence of heat transfer, the rate of temperature rise T_ is given by the rate of
energy dissipation per unit volume divided by the volumetric heat capacity, rcp, as follows:
t g_
T_ ¼
rCp

ð14:17Þ

Not only is temperature rise an important consideration in viscometry, where great care
must be taken in the design of viscometers to permit adequate temperature regulation, but it

POISEUILLE FLOW

265

must also be taken into account in the design of process equipment. In the steady-state
operation of extruders, for example, virtually all of the energy required to melt and
maintain the polymer in the molten state is supplied by the mechanical drive. Here,
however, we will limit our considerations to isothermal flows.
14.11

POISEUILLE FLOW

Axial, laminar (Poiseuille) flow in a tube of cylindrical cross section is another example of
a viscometric flow field. Here, geometry dictates the use of cylindrical coordinates. Fluid
motion is in the x (“1”) direction along the tube axis, the velocity gradient is directed
everywhere in the outward radial r (or “2”) direction, and the mutually perpendicular or
neutral direction is the tangential u (or “3”) coordinate. Consider a cylindrical fluid element
of radius r and length dx (Figure 14.10). Assume that the pressure in the fluid is a function
of the distance along the tube (x coordinate) only. The net pressure force pushing the
element in the x direction is the differential pressure drop across the element, dP, times
the area of the element’s ends, pr2. The motion of the element is resisted by a shear force at
its surface, which is the product of the shear stress, t rx, and the surface area of the cylinder,
2pr dx. In the steady-state flow, these forces must balance, so
2pr dx trx
¼ pr2 dP
Surface shear force Net pressure force

ð14:18Þ

Thus, the dependence of shear stress on radius (denoted t(r)) is
trx ðrÞ ¼ 

 r dP
2

ð14:19Þ

dx

For a tube with inner radius R (dropping the rx subscript on shear stress),
  
R dP
tw ¼ 
2
dx

ð14:20Þ

where tw is the shear stress at the tube wall (r ¼ R) and
tðrÞ ¼

r
tw
R

ð14:21Þ

r
x

P + dP

Trx

R

r
P

r
tu

dx

t

0

FIGURE 14.10

Force balance on an element in a cylindrical tube.

266

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW AND THE RHEOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS

Therefore, the shear stress varies linearly with radius from zero at the tube center to a
maximum of t w ¼ (R/2) (dP/dx) at the tube wall. Note that this result does not depend in
any way on the fluid properties.
Since the axial fluid velocity u is a function of the radial position only (denoted u(r)), we
may write
duðrÞ ¼

du
dr
dr

ð14:22Þ

Integrating with the boundary conditions u(R) ¼ 0 (i.e., the fluid sticks to the wall) and u
at radius r ¼ u(r) gives
uðrÞ ¼

ð uðrÞ

duðrÞ ¼

ðr

du
dr
R dr

0

ð14:23Þ

Realizing that the velocity gradient (du/dr) is the shear rate g_ (just replace y with r in
Eq. 14.2), we find that
uðrÞ ¼

ðr
R

_g½tðrÞdr ¼

ðr

tðrÞ
dr
h½tðrÞ
R

ð14:24Þ

where t(r) is given by Equation 14.19. The functions _g(t) or h(t) represent the material’s
steady-state viscous properties or flow curve, as discussed earlier. So, for a given pressure
gradient, the velocity profile in the tube may always be calculated from the flow curve by
1. choosing an r and calculating t from Equation 14.19,
2. obtaining g_ (or h) at the t above from the flow curve,
3. representing numerically or graphically the relation g_ (r) (or t(r)/h(r)), and
4. integrating from R to r, which gives u at r.
If an analytic representation of the flow curve is available, Equation 14.24 may be
integrated directly (provided the representation is simple enough). For example (verification will be left as an exercise for the reader, as they say in the math books), for a power-law
fluid g_ (t) ¼ (t/K)1/n and
uðrÞ ¼

i
½ðdP=dxÞ=2K1=n h ð1=nÞþ1
R
 rð1=nÞþ1
ð1=nÞ þ 1

ð14:25Þ

Equation 14.25 reduces to the familiar Newtonian parabolic profile for n ¼ 1.
Note that the above calculations are facilitated if the flow curve can be written as an
explicit function of t, that is, in the form g_ ¼ _gðtÞor h ¼ h (t). Although the power law
meets that criterion, neither the Carreau Equation 14.7 nor the modified Cross Equation 14.8 meets the same. For this reason, it is sometimes viewed as being easier to fit data
with a polynomial such as Equations 14.9a or 14.9b, rather than to use an established
constitutive equation to make these calculations (but note the cautions!).

267

POISEUILLE FLOW

u(r)
R

r

r

x

dA = 2prdr

dr

u
o

FIGURE 14.11

Determination of volumetric flow rate.

Looking at a differential ring of the tube cross section, with thickness dr, located
at radius r, where the velocity is u(r) (Figure 14.11), the differential volumetric flow
rate is:
dQ ¼ uðrÞ2pr dr

ð14:26Þ

where u(r) is the local velocity and 2pr dr is the area of the differential ring. Integrating
over the tube cross section gives
Q ¼ 2p

ðR

uðrÞr dr

ð14:27Þ

0

Therefore, knowing the velocity profile allows calculation of the volumetric throughput Q.
For a power-law fluid, insertion of Equation 14.25 into Equation 14.27 and turning the
crank gives
Q¼


 

dP=dx 1=n
p
Rð1=nÞþ3
2K
ð1=nÞ þ 3

ð14:28Þ

The average velocity V in the tube is defined by
V

Q
pR2

ð14:29Þ

Velocity profiles for power-law fluids in a tube are plotted in a dimensionless form in
Figure 14.12 for several values of n. The greater the degree of pseudoplasticity (i.e., the
lower n), the flatter the profile becomes. For a Netwonian fluid, where n ¼ 1, the profile is
parabolic.
Further development of flow curves for polymer melts are discussed in more advanced
rheology texts. Compared with many regular fluids, where simplifying assumptions can be
used in the analysis of flow behavior, the significant of viscous dissipation for polymers
must be considered as must entrance effects, where the polymer melt first enters a tube.
However, successful models have been developed that even allow scale-up for commercially relevant processes.

268

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW AND THE RHEOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS

10

C

0

C
n=

0

1/3

1

3

8

–r
R

05

0.5

1.0

0

1

2

3

u–
V

FIGURE 14.12 Velocity profiles for the laminar flow of power-law fluids in tubes.

14.12

TURBULENT FLOW

Due to the viscosity of polymer melts (and most solutions), laminar flow is all that you
would expect to see (recall that viscosity is in the denominator of the Reynolds number
(Re) and that large Re is required for turbulent flow). However, turbulent flow can be
encountered in dilute polymer solutions. As with the turbulent flow of Newtonian fluids,
pressure drops are conveniently handled in terms of the Fanning friction factor:
 
Rge dP
f  2
rV dx

ð14:30Þ

(The dimensional constant gc ¼ 32.2 ftlbm /lbf s2 is included here because these equations
are still sometimes used with the English engineering system of units; in SI units,

DRAG REDUCTION

269

gc ¼ 1 kgm/Ns2.) Since t w ¼ (R/2)(dP/dx) (the minus sign has been dropped, it being
understood that flow is in the direction of decreasing pressure), then
f ¼

2t w gc
rV 2

ð14:31Þ

Equations 14.30 and 14.31 apply to all fluids in both laminar and turbulent flow.
The next question is, “how do you define a Reynolds number for a fluid that has a
variable viscosity?” Metzner and Reed [16] proposed that the known relation between the
friction factor and the Reynolds number for the laminar flow of Newtonian fluids may be
applied to the laminar flow of non-Newtonians as well:
f 

16
Re

ðlaminar flow of all fluidsÞ

ð14:32Þ

Since Equation 14.32 has been defined to apply to all fluids in laminar flow, it may now be
used to obtain a generalized Reynolds number––applicable to all fluids in both laminar and
turbulent flow––by combining it with Equation 14.31 as follows:
Re ¼

8rV 2
t w ge

ð14:33Þ

For a power-law fluid, tgc ¼ Kð _gÞn ; combined with Equations 14.20, 14.28, and 14.29 give
Re ¼

8Dn V 2n r
K½6 þ ð2=nÞn

ð14:34Þ

Equation 14.41 reduces to the familiar Newtonian relation, Re ¼ r V D/h, with
h ¼ K ¼ K’, when n ¼ 1.
Equations 14.30–14.33 by definition should describe the behavior of all fluids in steadystate laminar viscous flow. They do so, provided that the true steady-state pressure gradient
is used in Equation 14.30 [17]. Approximation of the steady-state gradient by DP/L can
sometimes cause considerable error.
14.13

DRAG REDUCTION

Having defined the Reynolds number for non-Newtonian fluids, it would be nice to be able
to say that one could then use the standard friction factor–Reynolds number correlations for
solving turbulent flow calculations. Such is not always the case, however, because of a
startling phenomenon known as drag reduction that is often observed in the turbulent flow
of non-Newtonian fluids (Figure 14.13) [18] Small quantities of a polymeric solute can cut
the friction factor significantly at higher Reynolds numbers, despite the fact that the
solution viscosity is only slightly greater than that of the solvent. For example, 200 ppm of
guar gum (a natural, water-soluble polymer) reduces the friction factor in Figure 14.13 by
approximately a factor of five at Re ¼ 105, while the viscosity of the solution is 24% greater
than that of pure water.

270

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW AND THE RHEOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS

10-1
Conc., ppm
Sample jaguar A–20–D
Pipe diameter 1/2 in

3000
2000
1500
1000
500
200
100
50
20
10
Water

f
10-2

10-3
103

104

105

106

Re

FIGURE 14.13 Turbulent drag reduction as evidenced by a drop in friction factors with the
addition of polysaccharides to water [18]. Copyright 1972 by the American Chemical Society.
Reprinted with permission of the copyright owner.

The drag reduction phenomenon has important practical applications. Pressure drops,
and therefore pumping costs, can be reduced for a given flow rate or the capacity of a
pumping system (e.g., the Trans-Alaska pipeline) can be increased by the addition of a
drag-reducing solute. Fire departments add poly(ethylene oxide) to their pumpers to
increase capacity. Experiments have also been conducted with the aim of increasing ship
speed by squirting out a drag-reducing additive at the bow.
It has been suggested that drag reduction may be due to thickening of the laminar
sublayer (boundary layer at the liquid/solid interface) caused by the elasticity of the
polymer molecules (those polymer solutions that seem relatively inelastic are more likely
to be amenable to the usual treatment). It has also been pointed out that most of the energy
dissipation in turbulent flows occurs in small, high-frequency eddies. At these frequencies
(the reciprocals of which are smaller than the material’s relaxation time, giving high
Deborah numbers, see Chapter 15), the material responds elastically (such as bouncing the
Silly Putty rather than letting it flow down the wall), passing the stored elastic energy from
eddy to eddy rather than dissipating it. Very high elongational viscosities of polymer
solutions have also been implicated, even though the regular (shear) viscosities of the
solutions are not much higher than those of the solvent.
Drag reduction is known to be most pronounced for solutions of high molecular weight,
flexible-chain polymers, possibly because these form highly elastic solutions. Its magnitude is markedly reduced as the polymers are physically degraded by continued shear
during flow. The effects of polymer molecular variables have already been discussed [19].
On the other hand, drag reduction has also been observed with slurries of rigid particles or
fibers in Newtonian fluids. Perhaps, there is more than one cause.
As with Newtonian fluids, it is a pretty safe bet that flow is laminar for Re < 2100, but
drag-reducing additives often seem to delay the laminar-turbulent transition to higher
Re’s. The friction factor–Reynolds number relation remains a function of pipe roughness.

PROBLEMS

271

Unlike the Newtonian case, though, the f–Re curve seems to depend on the pipe diameter
when drag reduction is observed.
Unfortunately, the bottom line is that at present, in the absence of experimental data,
there are no quantitative methods for predicting which polymeric solutes will produce drag
reduction in a particular solvent, over what range of concentrations drag reduction will be
observed, or what its magnitude will be. Fortunately, neglecting drag reductions gives
conservative designs; any drag reduction that does occur will be a bonus in terms of
increased flow rate and/or reduced pressure drop.
14.14

SUMMARY

This chapter has introduced the field of rheology, where the flow of polymer solutions and
melts are studied. Polymers make for complex flow behavior, as their fluids are generally
non-Newtonian and their viscosity changes with shear rate. The flow behavior can change
with time and is dependent (at least to some degree) on temperature, pressure, and
molecular weight. This makes the measurement of the viscosity of polymeric fluids
particularly difficult. Methods used to measure viscosity and the rheological behavior of
polymers are covered in Chapter 16. While this chapter serves as an introduction to
rheology, there are numerous books and entire college courses on this subject.
PROBLEMS
1

The data below were taken from a prehistoric Ph.D. thesis (Rosen, S.L., Cornell
University, 1964) recently unearthed by archeologists. They were obtained at 100  C
on a sample of poly(ethyl acrylate) with a viscosity-average molecular weight of
310,000 and a very broad molecular weight distribution.
Compare the truncated (h1 ¼ 0) form of the Carreau Equation 14.7 and the modified
Cross Equation 14.8 for fitting these data.
t, dyn/cm2
3.15
3.70
4.53
5.91
7.34
1.00
1.47
2.20
2.72
4.00
5.23
6.49
7.73
9.00

10

3

104

_g, s1
0.00578
0.00696
0.00913
0.0112
0.0145
0.0213
0.0321
0.0548
0.0727
0.123
0.189
0.262
0.358
0.463

g_

t
1.36
1.67
2.44
2.76
3.22
3.59
4.29
5.03
6.59
7.96
9.40
1.16
1.33
1.52

10

5

106

1.01
1.60
4.15
5.08
9.66
12.76
25.4
50.8
127
254
550
1500
3140
6610

272

2

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW AND THE RHEOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS

Assume that the L-80 PIB in Figure 14.6a has M w ¼ 80,000. Its ho ¼ 6.67
350  F.

106 P at

If L-120 PIB has M w ¼ 120,000, what will be its ho at 350  F? Hint: Use
Equation 14.13b.
(b) In what proportions should L-80 and L-120 PIBs be mixed to produce a material
with ho ¼ 8.0 106 P at 350  F? Hint: See Equation 5.7.

(a)

3

Write the power law in the form h ¼ h(t).

4

The following data were obtained by N.D. Sylvester (Ph.D. Thesis, Carnegie Institute
of Technology, Pittsburgh, PA, 1968) at room temperature on a 1.10% aqueous
solution of Separan AP-30, a partially hydrolyzed polyacrylamide of molecular
weight 2–3 million:
t, dyn/cm2

_g, s1

365
434
471
536
566
616
653
695
748

415
748
929
1360
1630
2110
2360
2710
3400

Fit these data with one of the equations in the chapter. Obtain all the constants in the
equation.
5

Some equations give the viscosity as an explicit function of shear stress, h ¼ h(t).
Two equations of this form are

 t 2 1
h¼AþB 1þ
C
ðIÞ

h¼

D
1 þ EðtÞm
ðIIÞ

where A, B, C, D, E, and m are constants.
(a) Which of the above models (if either) is capable of showing a zero-shear
viscosity? What is the zero-shear viscosity in terms of the constants?
(b) Repeat (a) for an infinite shear viscosity.
(c) Which (if either) can exhibit a power-law region? What is the power-law
constant n in this region in terms of the parameters in the equation?
6

Prove that for a pseudoplastic fluid, Et Eg_ ; and that in the low-shear limit and for
all Newtonian fluids, Et ¼ Eg_ Hint: Consider viscosity to be a function of temperature and either shear rate or shear stress, and write an expression for its total
differential.

PROBLEMS

273

7

What is the relation between Et and Eg_ for a power-law fluid?

8

R.A. Stratton (J. Colloid Interface Sci. 22, 517 (1966)) provides t versus g_ data for
five essentially monodisperse polystyrenes of different molecular weight. Do these
data better fit the Carreau or modified Cross equations? Stratton obtains h o values by
extrapolating plots of h versus t to t ¼ 0. Do these equations give substantially
different values? Stratton’s values at 183  C are as follows:
Mw

105

0.48
1.17
1.79
2.17
2.42

h0

104 ; P
0.153
2.88
12.4
21.9
33.5

Do the above data conform to Equation 14.13ab?
9

Another four-parameter model for steady-state viscous flow is


AþB
g_
t¼
1 þ Ct m
where A, B, C, and m are constants.
(a) In terms of model parameters, what is ho?
(b) In terms of model parameters, what is h1?
(c) If the model is to represent a Newtonian fluid, what conclusion(s) can be drawn
about the parameters?

10

Equations 14.10 and 14.11 are two different ways of representing the temperature
dependence of zero-shear viscosity. For a material that follows the WLF Equation
14.11, obtain an expression for the temperature-dependent activation energy E in
Equation 14.10.

11

A polymer is being processed at 500 K. Mechanically, things are fine, but discoloration of the parts indicates that some thermal degradation of the material is occurring
during processing. A suggestion is made that the temperature be lowered to 450 K to
minimize degradation. You point out that this could cause serious mechanical
problems unless a switch was made to a different molecular weight polymer.Given
that the polymer has a flow activation energy of 10 kcal/mol and the current material
has M w ¼ 400,000, what can you say about the M w of a different grade of the same
polymer that will allow adequate processing at 450 K?

12

Sometimes even liquids made up of small, symmetrical molecules appear to be
pseudoplastic when measurements are made at very high shear rates in certain
viscometers. Why?

13

Consider the sample of poly(methyl methacrylate) in Example 5.3. What is the
minimum concentration of that polymer in acetone at 30  C necessary to assure that
Equation 14.13b is applicable?

274

INTRODUCTION TO VISCOUS FLOW AND THE RHEOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR OF POLYMERS

14

A Bingham plastic (if such a thing really exists) has a flow curve t  t y ¼ h’ _g, where
t y is a yield stress that must be exceeded to cause flow. Sketch the log t versus log g_
and log h versus log g_ for a Bingham plastic, showing limiting behavior at low and
high _g.

15

A power-law fluid is confined between two parallel, flat plates in simple shearing flow.
The lower plate is fixed and the upper plate moves with a velocity V. The plates are
separated by a distance d. Calculate and sketch the velocity profiles for n ¼ 0.5, n ¼ 1,
and n ¼ 1.5.

16

Injection molding consists of forcing a heated (molten) thermoplastic into a cooled
mold. It has been noticed that short shots (material freezing before the mold is filled)
can sometimes be cured by forcing the material through a smaller gate (narrower
diameter entrance to the mold). In fast, so-called “pin gates” (very small orifices at the
mold entrance) seem very effective at this. Why?

17

A general scale-up equation for the laminar flow of a power-law fluid in cylindrical
tubes may be written as


DP2
DP1

a  b  c  d
L2
D2
Q2
¼1
L1
D1
Q1

if we neglect entrance and exit effects. The subscripts 1 and 2 refer to two different
flow situations with the same fluid. Given that exponent a ¼ 1, determine exponents
b, c, and d.
18

In their new plant, Crud Chemicals must transport 10 gal/min of a room-temperature
polygunk solution 1000 ft with a maximum pressure drop of 500 psi. Laboratory data
on the solution, obtained in a 0.10-in diameter, 10-in long tube, are summarized by
Q ¼ 0:428 DP þ 0:00481 DP2
where DP is in psi and Q is in cm3/min. This equation holds up to the maximum
experimental DP of 40 psi. (Note: The fluid is pseudoplastic, but not power law.)
Calculate the minimum pipe diameter needed to do the job and check to see if flow
will indeed be laminar.

REFERENCES
[1] Barnes, H.A., J.F. Hutton, and K. Walters, An Introduction to Rheology, Elsevier, New York,
1989.
[2] Bird, R.B., R.C. Armstrong, and O.A. Hassager, Dynamics of Polymeric Liquids, Vol. 1, Fluid
Mechanics, Wiley, New York, 1977.
[3] Coleman, B.D., H. Markovitz, and W. Noll, Viscometric Flows of Non-Newtonian Fluids,
Springer, New York, 1966.
[4] Christensen, R.M., Theory of Viscoelasticity: An Introduction, Academic, New York, 1971.
[5] Darby, R., Viscoelastic Fluids, Dekker, New York, 1976.

REFERENCES

275

[6] Dealy, J.M. and K.F. Wissbrun, Melt Rheology and Its Role in Plastics Processing, Van
Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1960.
[7] Middleman, S., The Flow of High Polymers, Interscience, New York, 1968.
[8] Tanner, R.I., Engineering Rheology, Oxford University Press, New York, 1985.
[9] Best, D.M. and S.L. Rosen, Polym. Eng. Sci. 8 (2), 116 (1968).
[10] Bird, R.B., W.E. Stewart, and E.N. Lightfoot, Transport Phenomena, Wiley, New York, 1960,
p. 94, Example 3.5-1.
[11] Tseng, H.C., et al., Preprints, Soc. Plast. Engrs. Annu. Tech. Conf., 1985, p. 716.
[12] Best, D.M., Thesis, Carnegie Institute of Technology, Pittsburg, PA, 1966.
[13] Tobolsky, A.V., Properties and Structure of Polymers, Wiley, New York, 1960, Chapter II.8.
[14] Brandrup, J. and E.H. Immergut (eds), Polymer Handbook, 3rd ed., Wiley-Interscience, New
York, 1989.
[15] Carley, J.F., Modern Plastics 39 (4), 123 (1961).
[16] Metzner, A.B. and J.C. Reed, Am. Inst. Chem. Eng. J. 1, 434 (1955).
[17] Patterson, G.K., J.L. Zakin, and J.M. Rodriguez, Ind. Eng. Chem. 61 (1), 22 (1969).
[18] Sellin, R.H.J. and R.T. Moses, Drag Reduction in Fluid Flows, Techniques for Friction Control,
Ellis Horwood, Chichester (distributed by Wiley, NY), 1989.
[19] Zakin, J.L. and D.L. Hunston, J. Macromol. Sci.-Phys., B18 (4), 795 (1980).

CHAPTER 15

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

15.1

INTRODUCTION

In a traditional sense, engineers typically deal with elastic solids and viscous fluids as two
separate and distinct classes of materials. Design procedures based on these concepts have
worked pretty well because most traditional materials (water, air, steel, concrete), at least to
a good approximation, fit into one of these categories. The realization has grown, however,
that these categories represent only the extremes of a broad spectrum of material response.
Polymer systems fall somewhere in between (thus, the use of the term “viscoelastic”),
giving rise to some of the unusual properties of melts and solutions described previously.
Other examples are important in the structural applications of polymers. In a common
engineering stress–strain test, a sample is strained (stretched, bent, or compressed) at an
approximately constant rate and the stress is measured as a function of strain. With
traditional solids, the stress–strain curve is pretty much independent of the rate at which the
material is strained. However, the stress–strain properties of many polymers are markedly
rate dependent. Similarly, polymers often exhibit pronounced creep and stress relaxation
behavior (to be defined shortly). While such behavior is exhibited by other materials (e.g.,
metals near their melting points), at normal temperatures it is negligible and is not usually
included in design calculations. If the time-dependent behavior of polymers is ignored, the
results can sometimes be disastrous.
15.2

MECHANICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR VISCOELASTIC RESPONSE

An as aid in visualizing viscoelastic response, we introduce two linear mechanical models
to represent the extremes of the mechanical response spectrum. The spring in Figure 15.1a
represents a linear elastic or Hookean solid that can be used to describe the response to a
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

276

MECHANICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR VISCOELASTIC RESPONSE

G

(a)

h

(b)
t

t

G

(c)

277

(d)

G

h

h
t

t

h1
h1
G1
(e)

G

h2

(f)
G2

h2

t
t

FIGURE 15.1 Linear viscoelastic models: (a) linear elastic; (b) linear viscous; (c) Maxwell
element; (d) Voigt–Kelvin element; (e) three-parameter; (f) four-parameter.

shear force, whose constitutive equation (relation of stress to strain and time) is simply
t ¼ Gg, where G is a (constant) shear modulus of the material (or if subjected to a
stretching force, s ¼ E«, where E is the elastic modulus). Similarly, a linear viscous or
Newtonian fluid is represented by a dashpot (a sort-of piston moving in a cylinder of
Newtonian fluid) whose constitutive equation is t ¼ h _g, where h is a (constant) viscosity.
In contrast to the spring, which snaps back to its original length after the strain is removed, a
dashpot continues to expand as long as a force is applied, and when that force (strain) is
removed, the dashpot remains at its stretched position. In the model, the strain is
represented by the extension (stretching) of spring and/or dashpot.
The models developed here are visualized in tension, with tensile stress s, tensile strain
«, and Young’s modulus E. However, the same theory holds true for pure shear (viscometric) deformation, where a shear stress t results in a shear strain g with proportionality
constant G (Hooke’s modulus). h represents the Newtonian (shear) viscosity, while the
elongational (Trouton) viscosity is given by he.
Some authorities strongly object the use of mechanical models to represent materials.
They point out that real materials are not made of springs and dashpots. This is true, but
they are not made of equations either, and it is much easier for most people to visualize the
deformation of springs and dashpots than the solutions to equations.
A word is needed for the meaning of the term linear. For the present, a linear
response will be defined as one in which the ratio of overall stress to overall strain, the

278

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

overall modulus, E(t) or G(t), is a function of time only, not of the magnitudes of stress
or strain:
EðtÞ  s=«
GðtÞ  t=g

)
¼ function of time only for linear response

ð15:1aÞ
ð15:1bÞ

The Hookean spring responds instantaneously to reach an equilibrium strain (« or g)
upon application of a constant stress (so or to), and the strain remains constant as long as
the stress is maintained constant. Sudden removal of the stress results in instantaneous
recovery of the strain (Figure 15.2). Doubling the stress on the spring simply doubles the
resulting strain, so the spring is linear, with E(t) ¼ E or G(t) ¼ G, with E or G as constants,
according to Equations 15.1a and 15.1b. (In assuming that the spring instantaneously
reaches an equilibrium strain under the action of a suddenly applied constant stress, we
have neglected inertial effects. Although it is not necessary to do so, including them would
contribute little to the present discussion.)
If a constant stress (so or to) is suddenly applied to the dashpot, the strain increases with
time according to s ¼ («/he)t or g ¼ (to/h)t (considering the strain to be zero when the
stress is initially applied), Figure 15.3. Doubling the stress doubles the slope of the straintime line, and at any time, the modulus E(t)  s/« ¼ he/t ¼ E or G(t)  t/g ¼ h/t ¼ G,
where E or G are functions of time only. So the dashpot is also linear.
It may be shown that any combination of linear elements must be linear, so any models
based on these linear elements, no matter how complex, can represent only linear
responses. Just how realistic is a linear response? Its most conspicuous shortcoming is
that it permits only Newtonian behavior (constant viscosity) in equilibrium viscous flow.
For most polymers at strains greater than a few percent or so (or rates of strain greater than
0.1/s), a linear response is not a good quantitative description. Moreover, even within the

Input shear stress (t) or tensile stress (s)
t or s

2t o
or 2so
t o or so
Time
0

ts

Resulting shear strain (g ) or tensile strain (e)

g or e

2t o /G
or 2so /E
t o /G
or so /E
Time

FIGURE 15.2 Response of spring (purely elastic component) to shear stress or tensile stress
applied from time 0 to time ts. The spring snaps back to its original position immediately after
the stress is removed. Also note that the magnitude of the strain is directly proportional to the
applied stress.

MECHANICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR VISCOELASTIC RESPONSE

279

Input shear stress (t) or tensile stress (s)
t or s

2t o
2so
t o, so

Time
0

ts

Resulting shear strain (g ) or tensile strain (e)

g or e

Slope = 2t o /h
to
Slope = g = æ
h

2to
æ
h

to
t
æ
h s

ts

Time

FIGURE 15.3 Response of a dashpot (purely viscous component) to shear stress or tensile stress
applied from time 0 to time ts. The dashpot is permanently deformed from its original position. Also
note that the slope of the strain versus time curve is proportional to the applied stress. Not shown on
the figure: for the tensile strain, the slope would be so/he or 2so/he, respectively, for the two input
stresses, with the permanent deformation being « ¼ (so/he) ts for the input strain of so or (2so/he) ts
for the input strain of 2so.

limit of linear viscoelasticity, a fairly large number of linear elements (springs and
dashpots) are usually needed to provide an accurate quantitative description of the
material’s response. Hence, the quantitative applicability of simple linear models (those
with a few springs and dashpots) is limited, but the models are extremely valuable in
visualizing viscoelastic response and in understanding how and why variations in
molecular structure influence that response.
15.2.1

The Maxwell Element

James Clerk Maxwell realized that neither a linear viscous element (dashpot) nor a
linear elastic element (spring) was sufficient to describe his experiments on the deformation of asphalts, so he proposed a simple series combination of the two, the Maxwell
element (Figure 15.1c). In a Maxwell element, the spring and dashpot support the same
stress so
s ¼ sspring ¼ sdashpot

ð15:2aÞ

t ¼ tspring ¼ tdashpot

ð15:2bÞ

Furthermore, the total strain (extension) of the element is additive (i.e., the sum of the
strains in the spring and dashpot):
« ¼ «spring þ «dashpot

ð15:3aÞ

g ¼ g spring þ gdashpot

ð15:3bÞ

Differentiating Equations 15.3a and 15.3b with respect to time gives

280

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

«_ ¼ _«spring þ _«dashpot

ð15:4aÞ

g_ ¼ g_ spring þ g_ dashpot

ð15:4bÞ

Considering the shear strain in Equation 15.4b, and realizing that g_ dashpot ¼ t=h and
g_ spring ¼ t_ =G, plugging in and rearranging gives the differential equation for the Maxwell
element:
t ¼ hg_ 

h
t_ ¼ hg_  l_t
G

ð15:5Þ

The quantity l ¼ h/G has the dimension of time and is known as a relaxation time. Its
physical significance will be apparent shortly.
15.2.1.1 Creep Testing Let us examine the response of the Maxwell element in two
mechanical tests commonly applied to polymers. First consider a creep test, in which a
constant shear stress is instantaneously (or at least very rapidly) applied to the material and
the resulting strain is followed as a function of time. Deformation after removal of the stress
is known as creep recovery.
As shown in Figure 15.4, the sudden application of stress to a Maxwell element causes
an instantaneous stretching of the spring to an equilibrium value of to/G (or so/E if a
tensile stress is applied), where to is the constant applied shear stress (or so is the constant
applied extensional stress). The dashpot extends linearly with time with a slope of to/h (or
so/he for tensile experiments), and will continue to do so as long as the stress is
maintained. Thus, the Maxwell element is a fluid, because it will continue to deform
as long as it is stressed. The creep response of a Maxwell element is therefore
«ðtÞ ¼ so =E þ so =he t

ð15:6aÞ

gðtÞ ¼ to =G þ to =ht

ð15:6bÞ

Input shear stress (t) or tensile stress (s)
t o,
so
t or s
0

0

ts

Resulting shear strain (g ) or tensile strain (e)
to /G

g or e

0

to /G

t
Slope = æo
h

to
t
æ
h s

Time

FIGURE 15.4 Creep response of a Maxwell element to an applied stress. The bottom figure shows
the shear response, but a similar figure would also show the initial stretching of the spring due to a
tensile stress (so/E), and slope of the deformation due to the dashpot (so/he), with the recoil of the
spring being so/E and the permanent deformation being so/he * ts.

MECHANICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR VISCOELASTIC RESPONSE

281

or, in terms of compliance (for an applied tensile stress), where J  «(t)/so, or a creep
compliance (for an applied shear stress), where Jc(t)  g(t)/to,
J  «ðtÞ=so ¼ 1=E þ t=h

ð15:7aÞ

Jc ðtÞ  gðtÞ=to ¼ 1=G þ t=h

ð15:7bÞ

The creep compliance Jc(t), being independent of the applied stress to (for a linear
material), is a more general way to represent the creep response. When the stress is
removed at time ts, the spring immediately contracts by an amount equal to its original
extension, a process known as elastic recovery. The dashpot, of course, does not recover,
leaving a permanent set of (to/h)ts, or so/hets (for a tensile stress), representing the
amount the dashpot has extended during the application of stress. Although real materials
never show sharp breaks in a creep test as does the Maxwell element, the Maxwell
element does exhibit the phenomena of elastic strain, creep recovery, and permanent set,
which are often observed with real materials.
Creep testing also demonstrates another term commonly used in material testing, that is,
deformation. There are two types of deformation that may arise after a stress is applied to a
material: elastic deformation and plastic deformation. Elastic deformation refers to
materials whose shape changes temporarily, and once the force is removed, the material
resumes its original shape; this is equivalent to the spring representation in viscoelasticity
models. Plastic deformation refers to nonreversible changes in shape, represented by the
dashpot here. It is interesting to note that even for metals, the term plastic deformation is
used to indicate that a material has been deformed in a way that cannot be recovered.
15.2.1.2 Stress Relaxation Another important test used to study viscoelastic
responses is stress relaxation. A stress-elaxation test consists of suddenly applying a
strain to the sample, and following the stress as a function of time as the strain is held
constant. When the Maxwell element is strained instantaneously, only the spring can
respond initially (for an infinite rate of strain, the resisting force in the dashpot is infinite) to
a shear stress of Ggo, where go is the constant applied shear strain (or similarly for a tensile
stress of E«o, where «o is the constant applied tensile strain). The extended spring then
begins to contract, but the contraction is resisted by the dashpot. The more the spring
retracts, the smaller is its restoring force, and, correspondingly, the rate of retraction drops.
Solution of the differential equation for shear relaxation with g_ ¼ dg=dt ¼ 0 and the initial
condition t ¼ Gg o at t ¼ 0 shows that the stress undergoes a first-order exponential decay:
tðtÞ ¼ Ggo et=l

ð15:8aÞ

or, in terms of a relaxation modulus, Gr ðtÞ  tðtÞ=go ,
Gr ðtÞ 

tðtÞ
¼ Get=l
go

ð15:8bÞ

Again, the relaxation modulus, Gr(t), is a more general means of representing a stressrelaxation response because it is independent of the applied strain for linear materials.
From Equations 15.8, we see that the relaxation time l is the time constant for the
exponential decay, that is, the time required for the stress to decay to a factor of 1/e or 37%

282

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

Input shear strain (γ) or tensile strain (ε)
γο
γ (or ε)
0

0

Time

Gγ ο

Resulting shear stress (τ) or tensile stress (σ)

τ (or σ)
0.37Gγ ο

0

FIGURE 15.5

τ = G γ οe −t/λ

λ

0

Time

Shear stress relaxation of a Maxwell element to a constant applied shear strain.

of its initial value. The stress asymptotically drops to zero as the spring approaches
complete retraction (Figure 15.5).
Stress-relaxation data for linear polymers actually look like the curve for the Maxwell
element. Unfortunately, they cannot often be fitted quantitatively with a single value of G
and a single value of l, that is, the decay is not really first order.
Example 15.1 Examine the response of a Maxwell element in an engineering stress–strain
test, a test in which the rate of tensile strain is maintained (approximately) constant at _«o .
Solution. Using Equation 15.5a gives
s ¼ he «_ 0 

he
s_
E

or s þ

h ds
e

E

dt

¼ he _«0 ¼ constant

The solution to this differential equation with the initial condition s ¼ 0 at t ¼ 0 is
s ¼ he _«0 ½1  eðE=he Þt 
Since d«=dt ¼ _«o is constant and we can assume that « ¼ 0 when t ¼ 0
« ¼ _«0 t
The stress–strain curve is then
s ¼ he «_ 0 ½1  eðE=he _«0 Þ« 
This response is sketched in Figure 15.6. Note that at any given strain, s increases with
the rate of strain _«o , that is, the material appears “stiffer” (has a higher modulus). As crude
as this model might prove to be in fitting experimental data, it does account, at least
qualitatively, for some of the observed properties of linear polymers in engineering stress–
strain tests.

MECHANICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR VISCOELASTIC RESPONSE

283

he eo
•

he eo =ⴥ

E

•

he eo

e=

•

Sl

op

s

he eo = O
•

0

FIGURE 15.6

15.2.2

0

e

Response of a Maxwell element under constant rate of tensile strain (Example 15.1).

The Voigt–Kelvin Element

If a series combination of a spring and dashpot has its drawbacks, the next logical thing to
try is a parallel combination, a Voigt or Voigt–Kelvin element (Figure 15.1d). Here, it is
assumed that the crossbars supporting the spring and the dashpot always remain parallel, so
that the strain is the same in the spring and in the dashpot at all times:
g ¼ g spring ¼ gdashpot

ð15:9Þ

The stress supported by the element is then the sum of the stresses in the spring and in the
dashpot:
t ¼ tspring þ tdashpot

ð15:10Þ

Combination of Equations 15.9 and 15.10 with the equations for the deformation of the
spring and the dashpot gives the differential equation for the Voigt–Kelvin element:
t ¼ h g_ þ Gg

ð15:11Þ

When the stress is suddenly applied in a creep test, only the dashpot offers an initial
resistance to deformation, so the initial slope of the strain versus time curve is to/h. As the
element is extended, the spring provides an increasingly greater resistance to further
extension, so the rate of creep decreases. Eventually, the system comes to equilibrium with
the spring alone supporting the stress (with the rate of strain zero, the resistance of the
dashpot is zero). The equilibrium strain is simply to/G. Quantitatively, the response is an
exponential rise,
gðtÞ ¼

to
ð1  et=l Þ
G

ð15:12aÞ

1
ð1  et=l Þ
G

ð15:12bÞ

or, in terms of the creep compliance:
Jc ðtÞ ¼

284

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

Input shear stress (τ) or tensile stress (σ)
τo
τ
0
0

ts

τo /

Resulting shear strain (γ)
or tensile strain (ε)

pe =

το
/η

G

Slo

γ

το −t/λ
γ = —
e
G

το
γ = —
Ι − e −t/λ
G

[

]

0
0

FIGURE 15.7

ts

Time

Creep response of a Voigt–Kelvin element to an applied shear stress.

If the stress is removed after equilibrium has been reached, the strain decays exponentially,
gðtÞ ¼

t0 t=l
e
G

ð15:13Þ

Note that the Voigt–Kelvin element does not continue to deform as long as stress is applied,
and it does not exhibit any permanent set (see Figure 15.7). It therefore represents a
viscoelastic solid, and gives a fair qualitative picture of the creep response of some
crosslinked polymers.
The Voigt–Kelvin element is not suited for representing stress relaxation. The instantaneous application of strain would be met by an infinite resistance in the dashpot, and so
would require the application of an infinite stress, which is obviously unrealistic.
15.2.3

The Three-Parameter Model

The next step in the development of linear viscoelastic models is the so-called threeparameter model (Figure 15.1e). By adding a dashpot in series with the Voigt–Kelvin
element, we get a liquid. The differential equation for this model may be written in operator
form as




d
d
t ¼ h1 1 þ l 2
g_
ð15:14Þ
1 þ l1
dt
dt
where l1 ¼ (h1 þ h2)/G and l2 ¼ h2/G. Further, the form of Equation 15.13 suggests
modification by adding higher order derivatives and more constants:





d
d2
d
d2
1 þ l1 þ j1 2 þ    t ¼ h1 1 þ l2 þ j2 2 þ    g_
dt
dt
dt
dt

ð15:15Þ

This, of course, will fit data to any desired degree of accuracy if enough terms are used.

285

THE FOUR-PARAMETER MODEL AND MOLECULAR RESPONSE

15.3

THE FOUR-PARAMETER MODEL AND MOLECULAR RESPONSE

The four-parameter model (Figure 15.1f) is a series combination of a Maxwell element
with a Voigt–Kelvin element. Its differential equation is

€t þ


G1 G1 G2
G1 G2
G1 G2
€þ
_t þ
þ
þ
t ¼ G1 g
g_
h2 h1 h 2
h1 h 2
h2

ð15:16Þ

Its creep response is the sum of the creep responses of the Maxwell and Voigt–Kelvin
elements:
i
t0 t0
t0 h
þ tþ
1  eðG2 =h2 Þt
gðtÞ ¼
ð15:17aÞ
G1 h1
G2
or, in terms of creep compliance:
Je ðtÞ ¼

i
1
1
1 h
þ tþ
1  eðG2 =h2 Þt
G 1 h1
G2

ð15:17bÞ

This is summarized in Figure 15.8.

το
τ

0

0

ts

G1
η1
η2

G2

Eq.

Ret
ard
ed

ain
str
it c

γ

v

,
f low

/η 1
= τo

το
— Inst. elast. recovery
G1

ti c
las
de
rde
y
Reta cover
re

ela
s

το

us
isco

pe
slo

V -K

t1

το
t
—
η1 s

hpo

Das

Perm. set

Spring 1
0

το /
G1

0

λc

Inst. elast strain
ts

Time

FIGURE 15.8 Creep response of a four-parameter model for an input shear stress. Note that the
model also works for tensile stress, s, with its corresponding tensile strain, «.

286

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

The four-parameter model provides at least a qualitative representation of all the phenomena generally observed in the creep of viscoelastic materials: instantaneous elastic strain,
retarded elastic strain, steady-state viscous flow, instantaneous elastic recovery, retarded
elastic recovery, and permanent set. It also describes at least qualitatively the behavior of
viscoelastic materials in other types of deformation. Of equal importance is the fact that the
model parameters can be identified with the various molecular response mechanisms in
polymers, and can, therefore, be used to predict the influences that changes in molecular
structure will have on mechanical response. The following analogies may be drawn.
1. Dashpot 1 (Figure 15.1f) represents molecular slip, the translational motion of
molecules. This slip of polymer molecules past one another is responsible for flow.
The value of h1 alone (molecular friction in slip) governs the equilibrium flow of the
material.
2. Spring 1 represents the elastic straining of bond angles and lengths. All bonds in
polymer chains have equilibrium angles and lengths. The value of G1 characterizes
the resistance to deformation from these equilibrium values. Since these deformations involve interatomic bonding, they occur essentially instantaneously from a
macroscopic point of view. This type of elasticity is thermodynamically known as
energy elasticity.
3. Dashpot 2 represents the resistance of the polymer chains to uncoiling and coiling,
caused by temporary mechanical entanglements of the chains and molecular friction
during these processes. Since coiling and uncoiling require cooperative motion of
many chain segments, they cannot occur instantaneously, and hence account for
retarded elasticity.
4. Spring 2 represents the restoring force brought about by the thermal agitation of the
chain segments, which tends to return chains oriented by a stress to their most random
or highest entropy configuration. This is, therefore, known as entropy elasticity.
The magnitude of the timescale shown in Figure 15.8 will of course depend on the values of
the model parameters. The two viscosities, in particular, depend strongly on temperature.
Well below Tg, for example, where h1 and h2 are very large, ts needs to be on the order of
days or weeks to observe appreciable retarded elasticity and flow. Well above Tg, ts might
be only seconds or less to permit the deformation shown. An important thing to keep in
mind is that designs based on short-term property measurements will be inadequate if the
object supports a stress for longer periods of time.
Example 15.2 Using the four-parameter model as a basis, qualitatively sketch the effects
of (a) increasing molecular weight and (b) increasing degrees of crosslinking on the creep
response of a linear, amorphous polymer.
Solution.
(a)

As discussed in Chapter 14, the equilibrium zero-shear (linear) viscosity of poly w . Thus, the
mers, represented by h1 in the model, increases with the 3.4 power of M
slope in the steady-state flow region to/h1 is greatly decreased as the molecular
weight increases, and the permanent set (to/h1)ts is reduced correspondingly
(Figure 15.9).

THE FOUR-PARAMETER MODEL AND MOLECULAR RESPONSE

287

τ

Time

γ
Increasing mol. wt.
Mol. wt. = ∞
(Just crosslinked)
Increased

crosslinking

Very hightly crosslinked

0

ts

Time

FIGURE 15.9 The effects of molecular weight and crosslinking on the creep response to
application of a shear stress on an amorphous polymer. A similar response would be observed for
elongational strain, «, upon application of a fixed tensile stress, s.

(b)

Light crosslinking represents the limit of case (a) above, when the molecular weight
reaches infinity, since all the chains are hooked together by crosslinks. Under these
conditions, they cannot slip past one another, so h1 becomes infinite, as indicated by
the horizontal line in Figure 15.9, indicating that the dashpot allows no further
movement after the initial spring response. If the crosslinking is light (crosslinks few
and far between), as in a rubber band, coiling and uncoiling will not be appreciably
hindered. Note that crosslinking converts the material from a fluid to a solid (it
eventually reaches an equilibrium strain under the application of a constant stress)
and it eliminates permanent set. The equilibrium modulus of such a lightly crosslinked rubber will be on the order of 0.1 to 1 MPa, the characteristic “rubbery”
modulus. Further crosslinking begins to hinder the ability of the chains to uncoil and
raises the restoring force (increases h2 and G2). At high degrees of crosslinking, as in
hard rubber (ebonite), the only response mechanism left is straining bond angles and
lengths, giving rise to an almost perfectly elastic material with a modulus on the
order of 1 to 10 GPa, the characteristic modulus for a glassy polymer (below Tg).

The four-parameter model nicely accounts for the interesting examples of viscoelastic
response mentioned earlier. For example, dashpot 1 allows viscous flow, while the elastic
restoring forces of springs 1 and 2 provide the “rubber band” elasticity responsible for the
Weissenberg effect, which is when a polymer solution is drawn up around a mixing rod
rather than being flung outward. In engineering stress–strain tests, the moduli of polymers

288

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

are observed to increase with the applied rate of strain. At high rates of strain, spring 1
provides the major response mechanism. As the rate of strain is lowered, dashpot 1 and the
Voigt–Kelvin element contribute more and more to the overall deformation, giving a
greater strain at any stress, that is, a lower modulus. When Silly Putty is bounced (stress
applied rapidly for a short period of time), spring 1 again provides the major response
mechanism. There is not time for appreciable flow according to dashpots 1 and 2, so not
much of the initial potential energy is converted to heat through the molecular friction
involved in slippage and uncoiling, and the material behaves in an almost perfectly elastic
fashion. When it is stuck on the wall, the stress (in this case due to its own weight) is applied
for a long period of time, and it flows downward as a result of the molecular slip represented
by dashpot 1.
15.4

VISCOUS OR ELASTIC RESPONSE? THE DEBORAH NUMBER [1]

As discussed above, whether a viscoelastic fluid behaves as an elastic solid or a viscous
liquid depends on the relation between the timescale of the deformation to which it is
subjected and the time required for the material’s time-dependent mechanisms to
respond. Strictly speaking, the concept of a single relaxation time applies only to a
first-order response, and thus is not applicable to real materials, in general. Nevertheless,
a characteristic relaxation time lc for any material can always be defined as, for example,
the time required for the material to reach 1  1/e or 63.2% of its ultimate retarded elastic
response to a step change. A precise value is rarely necessary. The characteristic time is
simply a means of characterizing the rate of a material’s time-dependent elastic
response, short lc’s indicating rapid response and large lc’s indicating sluggish
response. The ratio of this characteristic material time to the timescale of the deformation is the Deborah number:
De 

lc
ts

ð15:18Þ

Response will appear elastic at high Deborah numbers (De  1) and viscous at low
Deborah numbers (De ! 0).
Consider, for example, the creep response of the four-parameter model (Figure 15.8).
For this model, a logical choice for lc would be the time constant for its Voigt–Kelvin
component, h2/G2. For De  1 (ts  lc), the Voigt–Kelvin element and dashpot 1 will be
essentially immobile, and the response will be due almost entirely to spring 1, that is,
almost purely elastic. For De ! 0 (ts  lc), the instantaneous and retarded elastic
response mechanisms have already reached equilibrium, so the only remaining response
will be the purely viscous flow of dashpot 1, and the deformation due to viscous flow will
completely overshadow that due to the elastic response mechanisms (imagine the creep
curve of Figure 15.8 extended a meter or so beyond the page). Under conditions where
De ! 0, materials can be treated by the techniques outlined in Chapter 14 for purely
viscous fluids.
Modifications of the devices described in Chapter 14 can also be used to obtain
information on the material’s elastic response. For example, if the stress is suddenly
removed from a rotational viscometer, the creep recovery or elastic recoil of the material
can be followed. This provides a value of lc for the material.

289

QUANTITATIVE APPROACHES TO MODEL VISCOELASTICITY

Example 15.3 Thermocouples and Pitot tubes (used to measure flowrate based on
differential pressures) inserted in a flowing stream of a viscoelastic fluid often give
erroneous results. Explain.
Solution. When a viscoelastic fluid in steady-state flow (De ! 0) encounters a probe, it
must make a sudden (De  0) jog to get around it. The retarded elastic response
mechanisms simply cannot respond fast enough in the immediate vicinity of the probe,
which for all practical purposes behaves as if it were covered with a solid plug. What is
measured, therefore, is not characteristic of the fluid in an unobstructed stream.
Example 15.4 (This is believed due to Professor A.B. Metzner and has probably been
verified by TV’s “Mythbusters” team.) A paper cup containing water is placed on a tree
stump. A 0.22-caliber bullet fired at the cup passes cleanly through, leaving the cup sitting
on the stump. The water is replaced by a dilute polymer solution in a second cup. This time,
the bullet knocks the cup 25 ft beyond the stump. Explain.
Solution. The characteristic relaxation time for a low molecular weight fluid such as
water is extremely short, much shorter than the time it takes the bullet to pass through the
cup (ts). This, then, is a low-De situation. The water behaves as a viscous fluid. The bullet
transfers a little momentum to it through viscous friction, but not enough to dislodge the
cup. Adding a polymeric solute raises the characteristic relaxation time many orders of
magnitude, to the point where this becomes a high-De experiment (the polymer chains
cannot respond fast enough to get out of the way of the bullet). The bullet, in effect, slams
into a solid and transfers much of its momentum to the fluid-cup system, carrying it beyond
the stump.

15.5

QUANTITATIVE APPROACHES TO MODEL VISCOELASTICITY [2–5]

Although the four-parameter model is useful from a conceptual standpoint, it does not often
provide an accurate fit of experimental data and therefore cannot be used to make
quantitative predictions of material response. To do so, and to infer some detailed
information about molecular response, more general models have been developed. The
generalized Maxwell model (Figure 15.10) is used to describe stress-relaxation experiments. The stress relaxation of an individual Maxwell element is given by
ti ðtÞ ¼ g 0 Gi et=li

ð15:19Þ

where li ¼ hi/Gi. The relaxation of the generalized model, in which the individual elements
are all subjected to the same constant strain g o is then:
tðtÞ ¼

n
X
i¼1

ti ðtÞ ¼ g0

n
X

Gi et=li

ð15:20aÞ

i¼1

Expressed in terms of the time-dependent relaxation modulus Gr(t), the response is

290

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

G1

G2

G3

Gn

h1

h2

h3

hn

h1
— = l1
G1

t

FIGURE 15.10 Generalized Maxwell model for material response to shear. Note that the model
can also be used to show the response to extensional stress, s.

Gr ðtÞ 

n
tðtÞ X
¼
Gi et=li
g0
i¼1

ð15:20bÞ

Now, if n is large, the summation in Equation 15.20 may be approximated by the integral
over a continuous distribution of relaxation times G(l):
Gr ðtÞ ¼

ð1

GðlÞer=l dl

ð15:21Þ

0

Note that while the Gi’s have modulus units (e.g., dyn/cm2 or MPa), G(l) is in modulus/
time units. Also note that if the generalized Maxwell model is to represent a viscoelastic
solid such as a crosslinked polymer, at least one of the viscosities has to be infinite.
For creep tests, a generalized Voigt–Kelvin model is used (Figure 15.11). The creep
response of an individual Voigt–Kelvin element is given by
g i ðtÞ ¼ t0 Ji ð1  er=li Þ

ð15:22Þ

where Ji ¼ 1/Gi is the individual spring compliance. The response of the array, in which
each element is subjected to the same constant applied stress to, is then
gðtÞ ¼ t0

n
X

Ji ð1  et=li Þ

ð15:23aÞ

i¼1

or, in terms of the overall creep compliance, Jc(t):
Jc ðtÞ 

n
gðtÞ X
¼
Ji ð1  et=li Þ
t0
i¼1

ð15:23bÞ

Again, for large n, the discrete summation above may be approximated by
Jc ðtÞ ¼

ð1

JðlÞð1  et=l Þdl

ð15:24Þ

0

where J(l) is the continuous distribution of retardation times (1/modulustime).

QUANTITATIVE APPROACHES TO MODEL VISCOELASTICITY

291

η1

G1

η1

— = λ1
G1
G2

η2

G3

η3

Gn

ηn

τ

FIGURE 15.11 Generalized Voigt–Kelvin model for an input shear stress, t. This model could also
be used for modeling tensile stress, s, with the corresponding moduli Ei.

If the generalized Voigt–Kelvin model is to represent a viscoelastic liquid such as a
linear polymer, the modulus of one of the springs must be zero (infinite compliance),
leaving a simple dashpot in series with all the other Voigt–Kelvin elements. Sometimes, the
steady-flow response of this lone dashpot, g dashpot ¼ (to/ho)t, is subtracted from the overall
response, leaving the compliances to represent only the elastic contributions to the overall
response:
gðtÞ ¼

n
X
t0
t þ t0
Ji† ð1  et=li Þ
h0
i¼1

ð15:25aÞ

n
X
t
þ
J † ð1  et=li Þ
h0 i¼1 i

ð15:25bÞ

Je ðtÞ ¼

Jc† ðtÞ ¼ Jc ðtÞ 
Jc† ðtÞ ¼ Jc ðtÞ 

n
X
t
¼
Ji† ð1  et=li Þ
h0
i¼1

t
¼
h0

ð1

J † ðlÞð1  et=l Þ

ð15:26Þ

ð15:27Þ

0

Here, ho is the steady-state (Newtonian) viscosity. The daggers indicate that the steadystate viscous flow has been removed and is treated separately.

292

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

Application of the discrete Equations 15.20 and 15.23 often involves a fairly large n
to describe data accurately, thus requiring an impractically large number of parameters li
and Gi ¼ 1/Ji. It has been suggested, however, that the individual parameters are
related by [6]
l0
li ¼ a
i

ð15:28Þ

1
h
¼ n0
Ji P
li

ð15:29Þ

Gi ¼

i¼1

Equations 15.27 and 15.28 require that the Gi all be the same and that ho ¼ Shi (with
hi ¼ liGi). They reduce the number of necessary parameters to three: ho, the steady-state
zero-shear viscosity; lo, a maximum relaxation time; and a, an empirical constant. The
Rouse theory [7] for dilute polymer solutions predicts a ¼ 2, but for concentrated solutions
and melts, better fits are obtained with a’s between 2 and 4 [6].
Often, enough discrete parameters to provide reasonable response models can be
extracted from experimental creep or stress-relaxation data using Tobolsky’s “Procedure
X” [4]. This procedure will be illustrated for stress-relaxation data in the form of the
relaxation modulus Gr(t). According to Equation 15.20b,
Gr ðtÞ ¼ G1 et=li þ G2 et=l2 þ G3 et=l3 þ   

ð15:20bÞ

The procedure is based on two assumptions. First, the Gi’s do not differ much in magnitude.
This often turns out to be the case. As noted in Equation 15.29, theory suggests that the Gi
should be identical. Second, there are a few discrete li, with l1 > l2 > l3 > . . ., and they
differ enough so that at long times, the second-, third-, and higher-order terms approach
zero, leaving only the first term to determine Gr(t). These assumptions are easily tested. If a
plot of ln Gr(t) versus t becomes linear at large t, the assumptions are valid. If that turns out
to be the case, the slope of the linear region at long times is 1/l1 and its t ¼ 0 intercept is
ln G1. The known response of the first Maxwell element can then be subtracted from the
overall response:
Gr ðtÞ  G1 et=l1 ¼ G2 et=l2 þ G3 et=l3 þ   

ð15:30Þ

and ln½Gr ðtÞ  G1 et=l1  is plotted versus t. Again, if a linear region is reached at long
times, the slope of that region is 1/l2 and its intercept is ln G2, and so on.
In principle, this procedure can be repeated indefinitely. In practice, the precision and
timescale of typical single-temperature experimental data rarely justify going beyond i ¼ 3.
Even so, the resulting three-element generalized Maxwell model can often give a good fit to
the data used to establish it. More importantly, the model can then be used to predict
material response in other types of deformation, at least over similar timescales. The time–
temperature superposition principle, which is discussed below, can extend timescales to the
point where the parameters may be established to i ¼ 6 or 7 or so.
Using the method developed here, a creep response can be predicted from stressrelaxation measurements, and vice versa. This interconvertability also applies to a variety
of linear mechanical responses in addition to the two types discussed here, as is illustrated

THE BOLTZMANN SUPERPOSITION PRINCIPLE

293

in the next section. The interconversion procedures have been discussed in detail by
Schwarzl [8,9]. Furthermore, the shape of the distributions G(l) or J(l) provides the
polymer scientist with information on molecular response mechanisms within the polymer.
For example, peaks in a certain region of l might imply motion of side chains on the
molecules. This type of information can lead to the “design” of polymers with the type of
side chains needed to provide particular mechanical properties.
15.6

THE BOLTZMANN SUPERPOSITION PRINCIPLE

Suppose a material initially free of stress is subjected to a test in which a strain g(to) is
suddenly imposed at t ¼ 0 and maintained constant for a while. This is classical stress
relaxation, and the stress will decay according to the material’s time-dependent relaxation
modulus Gr(t), that is, t(t) ¼ Gr(t)g(to). Now, however, at time t1, the strain is suddenly
changed to a new level g(t1), held there for a while, then at t2 changed to g(t2), and so on, as
sketched in Figure 15.12a. What happens to the stress as a result of this strain history? Well,
way back in 1876, Boltzmann suggested that the stresses resulting from each individual
strain increment should be linearly additive, that is,
tðtÞ ¼

n
X

Dti ¼

i¼0

n
X

Gr ðt  ti ÞDgðti Þ

ðfor t > ti Þ

ð15:31Þ

i¼0

g (t2)
g (t1)

Dg (t2)

g

Dg (t1)
g (t0)

Dg (t 0)

0
0

t1

(a)

t2

Time

Dg (t 2) G r(t-t 2)
t
Dg (t 1) G r(t-t 1)
Dg (t 0) G r(t-O)

0
0

t2

t1

Time

(b)

FIGURE 15.12 Boltzmann superposition principle: (a) applied strain history; (b) resulting stress
history. The experiment can also be reversed, with an applied stress history causing a strain history.
The shear stresses and strains shown can also be replaced with tensile stresses and strains.

294

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

where
Dgðti Þ ¼ gðti Þ  gðti1 Þ

ð15:32aÞ

Dti ¼ Gr ðt  ti ÞDgðti Þ

ð15:32bÞ

and

Here Dti is the stress increment that results from the strain increment Dg i. The argument
t  ti is the time after the application of a particular strain increment Dgi. This behavior is
sketched in Figure 15.12b.
According to Boltzmann, the stress in the material at any time t depends on its entire
past strain history, although since Gr(t) is a decreasing function of time, the further back a
Dg(ti) has occurred, the smaller will be its influence in the present. This leads to
the anthropomorphic concept of viscoelastic materials having a fading memory (like an
aging professor), with Gr(t) sometimes known as the memory function. (The concept, of
course, is valid even in the absence of linear additivity—it is just much more difficult to
quantify.)1
Example 15.5 A Maxwell element is initially free of stress and strain. At time t ¼ 0, a
strain of magnitude go is suddenly applied and maintained constant until t ¼ l/2, at which
time the strain is suddenly reversed to a value of go and maintained at that value
(Figure 15.13a). Obtain an expression for t(t) and plot the result.
Solution. The relaxation modulus (memory function) Gr(t) for a Maxwell element is given
by Equation 15.7b. For this particular strain history, Dg(to) ¼ þg o and Dg(t1) ¼ 2go
(remember, we need the increment, not the absolute value). Plugging these values into
Equation 15.31 gives
tðtÞ ¼ Gr ðt  0ÞDgðt0 Þ þ Gr ðt  t1 ÞDgðt1 Þ
¼ g 0 Get=l  2g0 Geðtt1 Þ=l
¼ g 0 G½et=l  2eðtt1 Þ=l
This result is plotted in dimensionless form in Figure 15.13b. Keep in mind that the second
term applies only at t > t1 ¼ l/2.
Of course, not all strain histories consist of a nice series of finite step changes. No matter
how an applied strain varies with time, however, it can always be approximated by a series
of differential step changes, for which Equation 15.31 becomes
tðtÞ ¼

ð gðtÞ
gð1Þ

Gr ðt  t0 Þdgðt0 Þ ¼

ðt
1

Gr ðt  t0 Þ

dgðt0 Þ 0
dt ¼
dt0

ðt
1

Gr ðt  t0 Þ _gðt0 Þdt0
ð15:33Þ

1

Note that this analysis is also applicable to material behavior when subjected to a tensile strain «(to), with tensile
stress s(t) and relaxation modulus Er(t) or vice versa when an applied tensile stress results in material strain.

295

THE BOLTZMANN SUPERPOSITION PRINCIPLE

g
–
go

1
0
-1
0.5

0

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

1/ l
(a)
1.0

0.5

e -1/l

t (t)
—–
goG

0

-0.5
-2e -(t-t1)1/l

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

(b)

FIGURE 15.13 Stress response of a Maxwell element to a changing shear strain (Example 15.5).

where t ¼ present time and t0 ¼ past time. A word is needed about the somewhat
bizarre (but fairly standard) notation in Equation 15.33. The implication is that to
evaluate the stress at the present time t, we must integrate over the entire past strain
history of the sample; hence, the lower limit of t0 ¼ 1. In some (but not all) cases, it is
convenient to assume that t ¼ g ¼ 0 for t0 < 0, in which case the lower limit on the integrals
becomes zero.
Equation 15.33 allows calculation of t(t) from stress-relaxation data Gr(t) for any
applied strain history as long as the response is linear. Furthermore, by inversion of
Equation 15.31, it is possible (at least in principle) to obtain Gr(t) from any test in which
both t(t) and g(t) are measured. When the independent variable is t(t) and you wish to
calculate g(t), analogs of Equations 15.31 and 15.33 may be written in terms of the creep
compliance Jc(t):
gðtÞ ¼

n
X

Dgi ¼

i¼0

gðtÞ ¼

ð tðtÞ
tð1Þ

Jc ðt  t0 Þdtðt0 Þ ¼

n
X

Jc ðt  ti ÞDtðti Þ ðfor t > ti Þ

ð15:34Þ

i¼0

ðt
1

Jc ðt  t0 Þ

dtðt0 Þ 0
dt ¼
dt0

ðt
1

Jc ðt  t0 Þ_tðt0 Þdt0
ð15:35Þ

296

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

When all is said and done, probably the best definition of a linear material is simply one
that follows Boltzmann’s principle. Thus, spring–dashpot models, which are linear,
automatically follow Boltzmann’s principle. However, it is important not to infer a
dependence of the Boltzmann principle on spring–dashpot models. The Boltzmann
principle applies to a linear response regardless of whether it can be described with a
spring–dashpot model. All that is needed are experimental Gr(t) or Jc(t) data. Models are
used here simply as a matter of convenience to illustrate application of the principle.
Example 15.6 Solve Example 15.1 by applying the Boltzmann superposition principle,
thereby demonstrating how the stress-time response in an engineering stress–strain test
may be predicted from stress-relaxation data.
Solution. The tensile stress-relaxation modulus for a Maxwell element is
Er ðtÞ 

sðtÞ
¼ Eet=l
«0

In tensile notation, with the assumption that s ¼ « ¼ 0 for t0 < 0, Equation 15.33 becomes
sðtÞ ¼

ðt

Er ðt  t0 Þ

0

d«ðt0 Þ 0
dt
dt0

But for an engineering stress–strain test
d«ðt0 Þ
¼ _«  constant ¼ _«0
dt0
Thus,
sðtÞ ¼ E«_ 0

ðt

0

eðtt Þ=l dt0

0

The integration is performed in the present time (i.e., t is a constant) over the material’s
past history, from t0 ¼ 0 to t0 ¼ t, with the result:
sðtÞ ¼ E _«0 l½1  et=l  ¼ he _«0 ½1  eðE=he Þt 
This was obtained by direct integration of the differential equation for the Maxwell element
in Example 15.1.
Example 15.7 To demonstrate the fact that the stress in a viscoelastic material depends on
its past strain history, calculate the stress t(ts) in a Maxwell element initially free of stress
and strain that is brought to a strain go at time ts by three different paths:
(a) For t0 < 0, g ¼ 0; for 0 t0 ts, g ¼ g o.
(b) For t0 < ts, g ¼ 0; for t0 ts, g ¼ go.
(c) g(t0 ) ¼ (go/ts)t0 .

DYNAMIC MECHANICAL TESTING

297

Solution.
(a)

This is good old stress relaxation. From Equation 15.8a:
tðts Þ ¼ Gg 0 ets =l

(b)

This corresponds to the initial extension in stress relaxation:
tðts Þ ¼ Gg0

(c)

This is the shear analog of an engineering stress–strain test with the constant shear
rate g_ o ¼ g o/ts. By analogy to the solution of Example 15.6 above:
tðts Þ ¼ Gg_ 0 lð1  ets =l Þ ¼ Gðg0 =ts Þlð1  ets =l Þ

15.7

DYNAMIC MECHANICAL TESTING

Creep and stress-relaxation measurements correspond to the use of step-response techniques to analyze the dynamics of electrical and process systems. Those familiar with these
areas know that frequency-response analysis is perhaps a more versatile tool for investigating system dynamics. An analogous procedure, dynamic mechanical testing, is applied
to the mechanical behavior of viscoelastic materials. It is based on the fundamentally
different response of viscous and elastic elements to a sinusoidally varying stress or strain.
If a sinusoidal strain, g ¼ g 0 sin vt (where v is the angular frequency in radian/s) is
applied to a linear spring, since t ¼ Gg, the resulting stress t ¼ Gg0 sin vt is in phase with
the strain. For a linear dashpot, however, because the stress is proportional to the rate of
strain rather than the strain, t ¼ hg_ ¼ hvg 0 cos vt, the stress is 90 out of phase with the
strain. These relations are sketched in Figure 15.14.
As might be expected, viscoelastic materials exhibit some sort of intermediate response,
which might look like Figure 15.15b. This can be thought of as being a projection of two
vectors, t* and g*, rotating in a complex plane (Figure 15.15a). The angle between these
vectors is the phase angle d (d ¼ 0 for a purely elastic material and 90 for a purely viscous
material). It is customary to resolve the vector representing the dependent variable into
components in phase (designated by a prime) and 90 out of phase (designated by a double
prime) with the independent variable. In this example, the applied strain is the independent
variable, so the stress vector (t*) is resolved into its in-phase (t0 ) and out-of-phase (t00 )
components, |g*| ¼ g 0 and g00 ¼ 0. In complex notation,
t ¼ t0 þ it00

ð15:36Þ

where i is the out-of-phase unit vector.
An in-phase or storage modulus is defined by
0

G 

t0
g0

storage modulus ðin-phase componentÞ

ð15:37Þ

298

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

γ¢

γ = γ ¢ sinω t

γ
o

ωt
π
—
2

o

3π
—
2

π

2π

Radians

Gγ ¢
τ = Gγ ¢ sinω t
τ Spring
o

ωt

ηωγ ¢

τ = ηωγ ¢ cosω t

o
τ Dashpot

FIGURE 15.14
applied strain.

ωt

Stress in a linear spring and in a linear dashpot in response to a sinusoidal

and an out-of-phase or loss modulus is defined by
G00 

t00
g 00

loss modulus ðout-of-phase componentÞ

ð15:38Þ

Both of these moduli have important physical significance to the design of materials.
A material with a high storage modulus and low loss modulus will be springy—it can be
used over and over again with little deformation. A material with a high loss modulus and
low storage modulus will favor the dashpot, resulting in an easily deformed material (which
is particularly useful in absorbing energy in a car collision).
The complex modulus G* is the vector sum of the in-phase and out-of-phase moduli:
G  G0 þ iG00 ¼

t0 þ it00 t
¼
g0
g

Complex modulus

ð15:39Þ

Additionally, a complex viscosity, h*, may be defined as
0

h  h  ih00 ¼

t
g_

Complex viscosity

ð15:40Þ

DYNAMIC MECHANICAL TESTING

299

τ∗

τ″

δ
ε

τ′

γ*=γ′
(a)
δ

τ∗
γ ′=γ*
γ

ωt
0

π
–
2

π

3π
—
2

2π

τ
(b)

FIGURE 15.15

Quantities in dynamic testing: (a) rotating vector diagram; (b) stress and strain.

Also [10],
g_ ¼ ivg

ð15:41Þ

By combining Equations 15.39–15.41 (and recalling that i2 ¼ 1), we get
0

0

h00 v þ ivh ¼ G þ iG00

ð15:42Þ

Comparison of the real (in-phase) and imaginary (out-of-phase) parts of Equation 18.40
gives
0

G ¼ h00 v

ð15:43Þ

G00 ¼ h0 v

ð15:44Þ

and

Furthermore, combination of Equations 15.40–15.43 and 15.43 reveals that
0

G ¼ G þ iG00 ¼ ivh

ð15:45Þ

300

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

From the geometry of Figure 15.15 and the relations above, the loss tangent, tan d, is
0

tan d ¼

t00 G00 h
¼ 0 ¼ 00
t0
G
h

Loss tangent

ð15:46Þ

The physical significance of the quantities just defined can best be appreciated by
considering what happens to the energy applied to a sample undergoing cyclic deformation.
From Equation 13.3, the work done on a unit volume of material undergoing a pure shear
deformation is
ð
W ¼ tdg

ð15:47Þ

g ¼ g0 sin vt

ð15:48Þ

t ¼ jt jsinðvt þ dÞ

ð15:49Þ

From Figure 15.15,

and

Differentiating Equation 15.48 with respect to (vt) gives
dg ¼ g 0 cos vt dðvtÞ

ð15:50Þ

Inserting Equations 15.49 and 15.50 into Equation 15.47 gives
W ¼ jt jg

0

ð
sinðvt þ dÞcos vt dðvtÞ

ð15:51Þ

Let us first consider the work done on the first quarter-cycle of the applied strain, that is,
integrate Equation 15.51 between 0 and p/2. Using appropriate trigonometric identities and
a good set of integral tables gives
Wð1st cycleÞ ¼ jt jg
1
4

0



cos d p
þ sin d
2
4


ð15:52Þ

Putting in terms of moduli or viscosities, using the trigonometry of Figure 15.15 and
Equations 15.41 and 15.42, we find:
ðg0 Þ2 0 p 0 2 00
G þ ðg Þ G
2
4

ð15:53aÞ

ðg0 Þ2 00 p 0 2 0
vh þ ðg Þ vh
2
4

ð15:53bÞ

Wð1st 14 cycleÞ ¼
Wð1st 14 cycleÞ ¼

The first term on the right side of Equation 15.53a is simply the work done in straining a
linear spring of modulus G0 an amount g 0 (the area under the spring’s stress–strain curve).

DYNAMIC MECHANICAL TESTING

301

It, therefore, represents the energy stored elastically in the material during its straining in
the first-quarter cycle. Hence, G0 is the storage modulus. If the applied mechanical energy
(work) is not stored elastically, it must be “lost,” converted to heat through molecular
friction, that is, viscous dissipation, within the material. This is precisely what the second
term on the right represents, so G00 is known as the loss modulus. Likewise, from
Equation 15.53b, stored energy is proportional to h00 and the dissipated energy is
proportional to h0 .
Considering the second quarter of the cycle, integrating Equation 15.51 from p/2 to p
gives results identical to Equation 15.53 except that the sign on the first (storage) term is
negative. This simply means that the energy stored elastically in straining the material from
0 to g0 is recovered when it returns from g 0 to 0. Thus, over a half cycle (0 to p or 180 ) or a
full cycle (0 to 2p), there is no net work done or energy lost by the elastic component. The
sign of the second term, however, is positive for any quarter cycle, so the net energy loss
(converted to heat within the material) for a full cycle (also obtainable by integrating
Eq. 15.51 between 0 and 2p) is simply
Wðcomplete cycleÞ ¼ pðg 0 Þ2 G00 ¼ pðg 0 Þ2 vh

0

ð15:54Þ

The average power dissipated as heat within the material h _wi is obtained by dividing the
energy dissipated per cycle by the period (time) of a cycle, 2p/v:
h_
Wiðavg: power dissipationÞ ¼ 12 ðg0 Þ2 vG00 ¼ 12ðg 0 Þ2 v2 h

0

ð15:55Þ

These results are of direct importance in the design of polymeric objects that are
subjected to cyclic deformation. In a tire, for example, high temperatures contribute to
rapid degradation and wear. A rubber compound with a low G00 (or h0 ) therefore helps to
minimize the energy dissipation and the resultant heat buildup. Moreover, dissipated
energy wastes gasoline, therefore such a compound also contributes to better gas mileage.
In the design of an engine mount, however, the goal is usually to prevent vibrations being
transmitted from the engine. Here, a material with a large G00 (or h0 ) would dissipate
considerable vibrational energy as heat rather than transmit it to the passengers.
Dynamic mechanical analyses are also done to estimate a material’s fatigue. The fatigue
lifetime for a polymer is defined as the number of cyclic loading and unloading it can
stand for a given stress before it fails. The higher the applied stress, the lower the fatigue
lifetime.
Example 15.8 Obtain expressions for the quantities G0 , G00 , |G*|, tan d, h0 , h00 , and |h*| for a
Maxwell element.
Solution. This problem is solved in Reference 10 (p. 56ff) by direct integration of the
differential equation for the Maxwell element. Here, we will apply Boltzmann’s superposition principle to obtain the results and, in doing so, again illustrate how information from
one type of linear test (stress relaxation) may be used to predict the response in another
(dynamic testing).
The shear stress-relaxation modulus (memory function) for a Maxwell element is
Gr ðtÞ ¼ Get=l

302

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

We will assume that the element has always been subjected to a shear strain:
gðt0 Þ ¼ g0 sinðvt0 Þ
which, when differentiated with respect to past time t0 , gives
_gðt0 Þ ¼ g0 v cosðvt0 Þ
(Keep in mind that the prime here has two entirely different meanings: when applied to t, it
designates past time; when applied to g, it means the in-phase component of the strain.)
Plugging these results into Equation 15.31 we get
0

tðtÞ ¼ Gg v

ðt

0

1

eðtt Þ=l cosðvt0 Þdt0

Evaluating the above integral is a nontrivial exercise, but again, with appropriate
trigonometric identities and a good table of integrals, the result is
tðtÞ ¼

Gg0 ðvlÞ2
1 þ ðvlÞ

2

sinðvtÞ þ

Gg0 ðvlÞ
1 þ ðvlÞ2

cosðvtÞ

(By assuming that the element has always been subjected to the periodic strain and
integrating from t0 ¼ 1, we eliminate the transient part of the solution that would arise
had we integrated from t0 ¼ 0.) It is clear that the first (sin) term in the above expression is in
phase with the applied strain, while the second (cos) term is 90 out of phase with the
applied strain. Therefore,
t0 ¼

Gg0 ðvlÞ2
1 þ ðvlÞ

2

and

t00 ¼

Gg0 vl
1 þ ðvlÞ2

From here on, its definitions and algebra are as follows:
t
GðvlÞ2
0
G ¼0 0¼
g
1 þ ðvlÞ2

and

G00 ¼

Gvl

0

jG j ¼ ½ðG Þ2 þ ðG00 Þ2 1=2 ¼
tan d ¼

t00
Gvl
¼
g 0 1 þ ðvlÞ2

½1 þ ðvlÞ2 1=2

G00
1
¼
G0
vl

h ¼

G00
Gl
h
¼
¼
2
v
1 þ ðvlÞ
1 þ ðvlÞ2

h00 ¼

G
Gl2 v
hvl
¼
¼
v 1 þ ðvlÞ2 1 þ ðvlÞ2

0

0

303

DYNAMIC MECHANICAL TESTING
10

(a)

10
|G″|/G

(b)
|η″|/η

G″/G

η″/η

G′/G

0.1

0.1

η′

/η

0.01

0.1

1.0
(ωλ)

10

0.01
01

1.0
(ωλ)

10

FIGURE 15.16 (a) Dynamic moduli of a Maxwell element (Example 15.8). (b) Dynamic
viscosities of a Maxwell element (Example 15.8).
0

jh j ¼ ½ðh Þ2 þ ðh00 Þ2 1=2 ¼

h
½1 þ ðvlÞ2 1=2

The dynamic moduli are plotted in dimensionless form in Figure 15.16a and the dynamic
viscosities are plotted in Figure 15.16b.

As when applied to other types of mechanical tests, the Maxwell element will not win any
prizes for quantitatively fitting dynamic data for real materials. Nevertheless, Example 15.8
does serve to illustrate the frequency dependence of dynamic mechanical properties, and
Figures 15.16a and 15.16b do in some ways that resemble the variation in isothermal
dynamic data with frequency for real materials. In particular, the apparent “stiffness” |G*|
increases to a limiting value with frequency. In the model, the dashpot simply cannot keep
up with high frequencies, leaving only the spring to respond. Also, the maximum in G00 is
usually observed at frequencies in the range where G0 and |G*| are falling from their highfrequency limit. In the model, at low frequencies, the dashpot offers little resistance to
motion and so dissipates little energy. At high frequencies, its high resistance prevents its
motion, limiting response to the spring, and energy dissipation again falls off.
With real materials, the high-frequency limit of |G*| and G0 corresponds quantitatively to
the moduli obtained in the limit of short times in stress-relaxation and creep measurements,
that is,
0

jG jðv ! 1Þ ¼ G ðv ! 1Þ ¼ Gr ðt ! 0Þ ¼

1
Jc ðt ! 0Þ

ð15:56Þ

Furthermore, the measured low-frequency limit of |h*| and h0 agrees with the zero-shearrate steady-flow viscosity ho:
0

jh jðv ! 0Þ ¼ h ðv ! 0Þ ¼ h0 ¼ hðg_ ! 0Þ

ð15:57Þ

304

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

The viscosity analogy has been pushed a bit further. The drop in |h*| with frequency
resembles the variation in steady-flow viscosity h with shear rate. On a purely empirical
basis, Cox and Merz [11] suggested that |h*| and h are the same when compared at equal
values of frequency and shear rate:
jh jðvÞ  hð _gÞ

at v ¼ g_

ð15:58Þ

Although not exact, Equation 15.56 appears to be at least a reasonable approximation.
For a generalized Maxwell model consisting of n elements (Figure 15.10), the results
obtained for a single Maxwell element in Example 15.8 are readily generalized to
0

G ¼

n
X

Gi ðvli Þ2

i¼1 1 þ ðvli Þ

2

ð15:59Þ

and
G00 ¼

n
X

Gi vli

2
i¼1 1 þ ðvli Þ

ð15:60Þ

(the other dynamic properties may be obtained from the two above, as in Example 15.8).
Presumably, the Gi and li determined from, for example, stress-relaxation data can be used
in Equations 15.59 and 15.60 to predict dynamic response, and vice versa. Equations 15.28
and 15.29 should be equally applicable to both. Also, the continuous distributions G(l) and
J(l) as obtained from stress-relaxation and creep measurements are at least approximately
interconvertible with G0 (v) and G00 (v) [2,4,8,9].
Techniques used to determine the complex behavior of real viscoelastic materials are
covered in Chapter 16.
15.8

SUMMARY

This chapter described spring and dashpot models for the viscoelastic behavior of
polymers. While a truly elastic material will stretch and contract back to its original
form, most polymers will deform to an extent dependent on the magnitude and duration of
an applied stress (shear or elongational). The ability of these materials to resist stretching or
shearing is measured through the elastic or shear moduli (E or G). Dynamic mechanical
testing breaks down these moduli into two components: a storage modulus that represents
elastic behavior and a loss modulus that represents viscous flow or deformation. These
moduli change with temperature, representing the material behavior below Tg (glassy),
between Tg and Tm (rubbery) and above Tm (flow). Finally, time–temperature superposition
was shown to be a useful tool by which the long-time behavior of a polymer can be
predicted through measurements covering a range of temperatures.
PROBLEMS
1

Given enough springs and dashpots, it is possible in principle to fit any linear response
to any desired degree of accuracy. For each of the individual springs, it is true by

PROBLEMS

305

definition that Gi ¼ 1/Ji (the shear modulus of each individual spring is the reciprocal
of its compliance).
Does it follow that Gr(t) ¼ 1/Jc(t)? That is, is a material’s stress-relaxation modulus
always the reciprocal of its creep compliance? Hint: Examine this question for the
simplest of materials, a Maxwell element.
2

Isothermal tensile creep data on polymers can sometimes be fit by an empirical
equation of the form
« ¼ AðB þ tC Þso
where « is the tensile strain, so is the (constant) applied tensile stress, and t is the time.
A, B, and C are positive constants.
(a) Is a material that follows this equation linear?
(b) What is the instantaneous elastic compliance?
(c) Is a material that follows this equation a liquid or a solid?
(d) Can this equation ever describe steady-state viscous flow? If so, under
what conditions, and what is the equilibrium tensile viscosity under those
conditions?

3

Example 15.1 analyzes the response of a Maxwell element in an engineering stress–
strain test. Do the same thing for a Voigt–Kelvin element. Illustrate the effect of strain
rate with a sketch. Do not expect great realism.

4

The four-parameter model discussed in the text consists of a series combination of
Maxwell and Voigt–Kelvin elements. Here, consider a four-parameter model that
consists of a parallel combination of Maxwell (G1, h1) and Voigt–Kelvin (G2, h2)
elements.
(a) Does this model represent a fluid or a solid?
(b) Is the model suited for representing creep, stress relaxation, neither, or both?
(c) In terms of model parameters, write the steady-state (t ¼ 1) strain in response to
an applied stress to.
(d) Which of the following is the model capable of representing?
1. Instantaneous elastic deformation
2. Retarded elastic deformation
3. Steady-state viscous flow
4. Instantaneous elastic recovery
5. Retarded elastic recovery
6. Permanent set

5

Analyze the dynamic properties of a Voigt–Kelvin element, that is, obtain G0 and G00 in
terms of model parameters G and h and the frequency v. Hint: Unless you are a
masochist, do not use the Boltzmann principle here. Just examine the response to a
sinusoidal strain.

6

Examine the response of a two-element generalized Maxwell model (Figure 15.10)
with the following parameters:
G1 ¼ 109 Pa
G2 ¼ 105 Pa

h1 ¼ 106 P
h2 ¼ 106, 108, 1 P

306

LINEAR VISCOELASTICITY

(a) Plot log Gr(t) versus log t.
(b) Plot log G0 and log G00 versus log v with h2 ¼ 108 P.
(c) Assume that the above model parameters apply at Tg þ 20 C, and further that the
model’s temperature shift factors aT are given by the WLF equation with the
“universal” constants. Plot the log of the 10-s relaxation modulus, Gr(10) versus
(T  Tg).
Cover a wide enough range of the independent variable so that the G’s range between
103 Pa and 109 Pa.
7

The text defines the Deborah number for transient and dynamic tests. How would you
define De for an engineering stress–strain test?

8

A Maxwell element has G ¼ 107 Pa and l ¼ 1 s at a temperature of T ¼ Tg þ 20 C.
Assume that the element’s shift factors are given by the WLF equation with
“universal” constants. Calculate G0 and G00 at a frequency of v ¼ 1/s and a temperature
of T ¼ Tg þ 40 C.

9

A three-parameter model, the Zener element or standard linear solid (SLS), has been
used to represent viscoelastic behavior in certain solids. Two equivalent forms of the
SLS are:
(a) A spring (G2) in series with a Voigt–Kelvin element (G1, h1) and
(b) A spring (G3) in parallel with a Maxwell element (G4, h2).
Obtain the equations necessary to relate the spring constants in one form of the SLS to
the spring constants in the other, that is, given G1 and G2, how could you determine G3
and G4, or vice versa?

10

The shear creep compliance of a thermoplastic at 25 C is described by
Jc25 ðtÞ ¼ 1:2

103 t0:10

ðm2 =N with t in sÞ

This material has Tg ¼ 0 C. Assume that its temperature shift factors are given
by the WLF equation (Eq. 14.11) with the “universal” constants. Obtain an
equation that gives its shear creep compliance at 35 C, Jc35(t).
(b) The material is subjected to the following stress history at 25 C:

(a)

t<0s
0 t < 1000 s
1000 t < 2000 s
2000 t s

t ¼ 0 Pa
t ¼ 1000 Pa
t ¼ 1500 Pa
t ¼ 0 Pa

Calculate the shear strain at 2500 s.
11

The four-parameter model (Figure 15.1f) is subjected to the following stress history, in
which to is a constant stress:
t<0
0 t < ts
ts t < 2ts
2ts t

t¼0
t ¼ to
t ¼ þ2to
t¼0

Write an expression for the permanent set g(1) that results from this stress history.

REFERENCES

307

12

Consider the four-parameter model (Figure 15.1f). In terms of model and test
parameters, answer the following.
(a) What is the initial modulus Gr(0) in stress relaxation?
(b) What is the equilibrium modulus Gr(1) in stress relaxation?
(c) Repeat (b) when the model is used to represent a lightly crosslinked polymer.
(d) In the shear analog of an engineering stress–strain test (g_ o constant), what is the
limiting high strain rate (g_ o ! 1) modulus.
(e) Repeat (d) for the limiting low strain rate (g_ o ! 0) modulus.
(f) In a dynamic test, what is the limiting low-frequency storage modulus,
G0 (v ! 0)?
(g) In a dynamic test, what is the limiting high-frequency storage modulus,
G0 (v ! 1)?
(h) Repeat (f) for G00 .
(i) Repeat (g) for G00 .

13

Consider a four-parameter model made up of a Maxwell element (G1, h1) in parallel
with a Voigt–Kelvin element (G2, h2). Obtain expressions for G0 (v) and G00 (v) for this
model in terms of the model parameters.

REFERENCES
[1] Reiner, M., Phys. Today, Jan. 1964, p. 62.
[2] Ferry, J.D., Viscoelastic Properties of Polymers, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 1980.
[3] Eirich, F.R. (ed.), Rheology, Vols. 1–4, Academic, New York, 1956–1964.
[4] Tobolsky, A.V., Properties and Structure of Polymers, Wiley, New York, 1960.
[5] Nielsen, L.E., Mechanical Properties of Polymers and Composites, Vol. 1, Dekker, New York,
1974.
[6] Spriggs, T.W., Chem. Eng. Sci., 20, 931 (1965).
[7] Rouse, P.E., Jr., J. Chem. Phys. 24, 269 (1956).
[8] Schwarzl, F.R., Pure and Appl. Chem. 23, 219 (1970).
[9] Schwarzl, F.R., Rheol. Acta, 8, 6 (1969); 9, 382 (1970); 10, 166 (1971); 14, 581 (1975).
[10] McKelvey, J.M., Polymer Processing, Wiley, New York, 1962.
[11] Cox, W.P. and Merz, E.H., J. Polym. Sci. 28, 619 (1958).

CHAPTER 16

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

16.1

INTRODUCTION

This chapter covers some of the methods and instruments used to determine the mechanical
properties of polymers. Examples of instrument designs and typical data generated in these
measurements will be introduced. In particular, automated axial tensiometers (to find
elastic modulus, yield stress, and ultimate stress), dynamic mechanical analyzers (to
determine storage and loss moduli), and rheometers (to measure flow viscosity) will be
introduced. This chapter considers the principles behind the devices used to establish and
measure the properties of viscometric flows. One of the common techniques used to
determine viscous flow properties, Poisueille (laminar) flow in cylindrical tubes, is also
important in technical applications, as polymer melts and solutions are often transported
and processed in this manner. The time–temperature superposition principle is also covered
as a way to predict polymer behavior over long timescales by testing materials across a
range of temperatures.
16.2

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF POLYMERS

A number of physical parameters can be measured as a way to characterize polymers. The
specific tests that are done are normally dictated by the end use of a particular part. We have
defined many of these parameters in the previous few chapters, such as elastic (or Young’s)
modulus, E, shear (or Hooke’s) modulus, G, storage modulus (E’ or G’), loss modulus (E”
or G”), tan d, which all apply to solids, as well as the viscosity used for polymer melts (and
solutions) as described with polymer rheology. In addition to these terms, you may also run
across hardness (how resistant the polymer is to penetration by a needle), toughness
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

308

AXIAL TENSIOMETERS

FIGURE 16.1

309

The effects of temperature on Young’s Modulus.

(measures the total amount of energy that can be absorbed by a polymer before it fails or
breaks), impact resistance (ability not to shatter upon sudden application of force), fatigue
(ability to withstand cyclic forces and maintain mechanical integrity), and wear (how the
surface of a polymer may be degraded or worn by friction).
While any individual polymer will have unique properties (due to sample geometry,
polymer molecular weight, presence of crystals or crosslinks, etc.), some generalized
characterizations can be made. We are well aware that temperature plays a large role in the
state and behavior of polymers. Many mechanical properties follow a similar trend to that
observed in Figure 16.1 for elastic modulus versus temperature. There are five general
regions that describe the polymer depicted in this graph. At low temperatures (below Tg),
the polymer is considered glassy. Closer to the Tg, the feel of the polymer softens slightly,
and thus is referred to as leathery; above the Tg, the polymer reaches a rubbery plateau,
where it is pliable and flexible. Nearing Tm, the polymer starts to melt and reaches a rubbery
flow region, where the flow may be somewhat reversible if a force is removed. At the
highest temperatures (assuming the polymer is not degraded), we have viscous flow, which
is covered by the discussion on rheology in Chapter 14. While the absolute numbers on the
y-axis will not be true for all polymers, it does show that temperature has a large effect on
mechanical properties of the polymer.
16.3

AXIAL TENSIOMETERS

In many common applications of polymers, they are exposed to a uniaxial stress, by which
they can stretch and rebound (if purely elastic) or stretch and deform with a smaller degree
of rebound (for true viscoelastic materials). The equipment used for testing polymer
mechanics are largely the same as those used for metals or ceramics, but the amount of
force required to stretch a polymer will be (considerably) smaller. Automated materials
testing apparatus (such as the one shown in Figure 16.2) have a range of designs, from the
most common stretching, done by placing flat dogbone-shaped samples between clamps
and measuring the force required to stretch, to instruments that can measure the force and
deformation on samples subjected to compression or three-point bending and even
instruments that can model human joints or test materials that are submerged in water.
For such axial tension experiments, the results are normally plotted as stress–strain
curves. If the rate of strain is fixed and constant, the x-axis (independent variable) can be

310

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

FIGURE 16.2 An automated materials testing apparatus typically applies a known stress on a
dogbone-shaped sample and measures the resulting stretch (strain). A fixed or linear strain can also be
programmed with the required force (or stress) measured as the sample is stretched.

either strain or time. The y-axis normally represents the stress on the given sample that is
calculated by dividing the forces measured during the stretching experiment by the initial
cross-sectional area of the sample, to give the typical pressure units of stress (Pa, or more
commonly MPa or GPa).
A set of stress–strain curves are shown in Figure 16.3. At the lower temperature (the
upper plot), the slopes of the linear portion of each plot are higher, as would be expected for

FIGURE 16.3 Stress–strain curves for different samples of block copolymers of caprolactone
with n-butyl acrylate tested at (a) room temperature and (b) 70  C. Polymer compositions were 0,
20, 39, 50 and 71 wt% n-butyl acrylate from top to bottom in (a). Reprinted with permission from
Referenece 1. Copyright 2001 National Academy of Sciences, USA.

VISCOSITY MEASUREMENT

311

glassy polymers (compared to rubbery polymers at the higher temperature). The modulus
of elasticity is easily found from the slope in the linear portion of the curve.
s ¼ E«

ð16:1Þ

The higher the slope, the higher the modulus, indicating that the material resists
stretching with greater force. For most polymers, there exists a yield stress, sy, below
which the deformation is elastic, as the material can snap back to its original conformation
upon release of the force. The yield stress is most easily seen in Figure 16.3a, which marks
the transition from linearity to uneven stretching. Beyond this yield stress, the material
begins to deform permanently. As the force continues to stretch the sample, polymer chains
physically move and rearrange the macromolecular structure. This causes necking and
narrowing of the sample width and thickness. Because the polymer chains are slipping over
each other above the yield stress, the sample is likely to “give” much easier, resulting in
what can be significant, stretching without any additional force. This is the behavior that is
described by the dashpot in viscoelastic models, but just because chains are able to slip over
each other and rearrange does not mean that the material has failed . . . just that it cannot
snap back to its original configuration. By continuing to stretch the polymer, it may actually
toughen a bit (often because the rearrangement of chains leads to an increase in
crystallinity) before reaching the ultimate stress, su, where the sample breaks. In
Figure 16.3, the ultimate stress for each of the samples is the highest stress each sample
can withstand, which is at the right end of each curve, just prior to the sample breaking (and
the measured stress dropping to zero).
These experiments are great at picking out mechanical properties of materials subjected
to single axial stresses. To study the effect of cyclic stresses, a dynamic mechanical
analyzer (DMA) is recommended (next section).
16.4

VISCOSITY MEASUREMENT

 y,
As noted in Chapter 5, viscometry can be used to estimate polymer molecular weight,M
but those solutions were required to be dilute. For polymer melts and more concentrated
solutions, viscosity measurements require viscometers configured somewhat differently
from the capillary viscometers introduced in Chapter 5. Details of such instruments and
procedures have been reviewed [2,3].
16.4.1

The Couette Viscometer

One common device for measuring viscous properties is the cup-and-bob or Couette
viscometer (Figure 16.4). The fluid is confined in the gap between two concentric cylinders,
one of which rotates relative to the other at a known angular velocity while the torque on
one is measured. This is a classic example of viscometric flow. In cylindrical coordinates,
we assume only a tangential velocity component, so the 1 coordinate is the tangential or 
direction and the 2 coordinate is the radial direction.
Example 16.1
(a) Neglecting end effects, determine the shear stress as a function of radius in terms of
the measured torque on the stationary inner cylinder (bob), M(Ri), and the geometry

312

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

Ro

R1

Bob

Cup

FIGURE 16.4

Schematic of Couette (cup-and-bob) viscometer.

of the apparatus as the outer cylinder (cup) is rotated with an angular velocity v
(radians/s).
(b) The is the classic example of a viscometric flow in which the shear rate is not equal
to the velocity gradient dv/dr. As a result, determining the shear rate as a function
of radius is not easy. Bird et al. [4] did it by assuming a Newtonian relation between
shear stress and shear rate. In general, however, the nature of the flow curve is not
known a priori, and must be determined by viscometry. One means of doing this is
to make the gap between the cylinders (Ro  Ri) very small compared to the radius
of either cylinder. Letting Ro  Ri ¼ d and Ro  Ri ¼ R, obtain the expression for
shear rate in terms of v and the geometry.
Solution.
(a) In a rotating system at steady state, S torques ¼ 0, or there would be angular
acceleration. Consider a ring of fluid with inner radius Ri and outer radius r: M
(r) ¼ M(Ri)
2prL
tðrÞ r
MðRiÞ
Surface
Moment ¼ Measured
area
arm
torque
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ {zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ }
Force

tðrÞ ¼

MðRiÞ
2pr2 L

ð16:2Þ

VISCOSITY MEASUREMENT

313

w
r cos a

R
Cone

a

dr

Sample

r

ra

f

Plate

FIGURE 16.5

Schematic of cone-and-plate viscometer.

(b) This situation approximates the case of two flat plates separated by a distance d (i.e.,
for a large enough cylinder, the fluid does not experience much curvature), one
sliding past the other with a linear velocity equal to the tangential velocity Rv:
g_ ¼

Rv
d

ðfor d  Ri onlyÞ

ð16:3Þ

Where the geometric approximations in the example above are not applicable,a more
sophisticated analysis has been developed by Kreiger and Maron [5]. Another challenge
to analyzing the Couette viscometer is accounting for the area below the bob at the
bottom of the viscometer. This is best accounted for by making measurements with two
fluid depths, the lower being well above the bottom of the bob, and using the differences
between torques and depths in Equation 16.2, thereby subtracting out the effects of
non-Couette flow at the bottom of the viscometer. Another approach is illustrated later
in Example 16.3.
16.4.2

The Cone-and-Plate Viscometer

The cone-and-plate viscometer is another type of rotational viscometer. Here, the sample
is sheared between a flat plate and a broad cone whose apex contacts the plate
(Figure 16.5). For small cone-plate angles a, this approximates a viscometric flow with
(in spherical coordinates) flow in the tangential  or 1 direction and the gradient in the
azimuthal  or 2 direction. Here, the radial direction is the neutral or 3 coordinate.1 It
turns out that true viscometric flow of this type is inconsistent with the equations of
motion if the inertial terms are included. (Formal flow solutions for rotational viscometers normally neglect the inertial terms in the equations of motion, as we tacitly do
here.) There must, therefore, be radial and azimuthal velocity components. These are
minimized in practice by keeping a quite small, often less than 1 . The great advantage of
this type of device is that (for small a) the shear rate, and hence the shear stress, is uniform
throughout the material.

1
At first glance, it might seem that there is a gradient component in the r direction because the tangential velocity
increases with r. However, material points in a cone at constant  do not move relative to one another, that is, they
undergo rigid-body rotation, so there is no shearing in the r direction.

314

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

Example 16.2 Obtain the expressions for shear rate and shear stress in a cone-and-plate
viscometer in terms of the rate of cone rotation v, the measured torque M, and the
geometry.
Solution. (See Figure 16.5). The tangential velocity v of a point on the cone relative to the
plate is v ¼ vr cos a. Fluid is sheared between that point and the plate over a distance
d ¼ ar:
g_ ¼

y  vr cos a small v
¼
! ðindependento of rÞ
a a
d
ar

ð16:4Þ

Torque ¼ (Shear stress) (Area) (Moment arm)
dM ¼ ðtÞð2pr cos a drÞðr cos aÞ
Integrating over the cone face gives
M ¼ 2pt cos a

ð R=cos a

2

O

r2 dr ¼

3M
t¼
2pR3

2pt R3 small 2pt R3
!
3 cos a a
3

ð16:5Þ

Note: Here, t is constant, and can be taken outside the integral, because t ¼ t (g.), and g. is
constant, as shown by Equation 16.4.

Cone-and-plate viscometers of the type shown here are usually limited to fairly low shear
rates. At higher shear rates, solutions tend to be flung from the gap by centrifugal force, and
melts tend to “ball up” (like rubbing a finger over dry rubber cement). These problems can
be overcome by enclosing the fluid around a biconical rotor, giving, in effect, two coneand-plate viscometers back-to-back [6]. The flow curves earlier in this chapter were
obtained with such a device.
Example 16.3 One means of minimizing end effects in a Couette viscometer is to make the
bottom of a bob a cone, the apex of which contacts the base of the cup, so that the area
beneath the bob is a cone-and-plate viscometer. For a Couette geometry in which the gap d
is much smaller than the bob radius Ri, what must the cone angle a be to match the shear
rates in the Couette and the cone-and-plate regions?
Solution. By equating the expressions for shear rate from the previous two examples,
a ¼ d/R.
16.4.3

The Disk-and-Plate Viscometer

Another type of viscometer that finds occasional use is the disk-and-plate viscometer
(Figure 16.6). A disk of radius R rotates with an angular velocity of v relative to a parallel

VISCOSITY MEASUREMENT

315

w
R
Disk
r

x

Sample

d

Plate

FIGURE 16.6 Schematic of disk-and-plate viscometer.

plate. The disk-and-plate are separated by a distance d (d « R), with the test fluid in
between. The torque M on either the disk or the plate is measured. This is known as
torsional (twisting) flow, and is another example of a viscometric flow.
Example 16.4
(a) Identify the 1 (flow), 2 (gradient), and 3 (neutral) directions with respect to the
cylindrical coordinates in Figure 16.6.2
(b) Obtain an expression for _g. Why is the cone-and-plate geometry usually preferred?
(c) Obtain an expression for the torque M needed to maintain a steady rate of rotation v
when a power-law fluid is in the gap.
Solution.
(a) 1 (flow) ¼ , 2 (gradient) ¼ z, 3 (neutral) ¼ r.
(b)
Relative velocity; disk to plate rv
¼
g_ ¼
Separation distance
d

ð16:6Þ

In this geometry, unlike the cone-and-plate, the shear rate increases linearly with
radius, and so is not uniform throughout the fluid.
(c) Consider a differential ring of the disk (or plate) surface, at radius r with
thickness dr:
dA ¼ 2pr dr
dM ¼ rtdA ¼ 2pr2 tdr
For a power law fluid, t ¼ Kg_ n ¼ K(rv/d)n,
M ¼ 2pK

2

vn ð R
2pKðv=dÞn 3þn
R
r2þn dr ¼
d
3þn
0

See the previous footnote. Here, points at constant z undergo rigid-body rotation like a phonograph record.

316

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

or
M¼

2pKR3
ðg_ Þn
3þn R

ðpower-law fluidÞ

ð16:7Þ

Rv
d

ð16:8Þ

where
g_ R ¼

16.5

DYNAMIC MECHANICAL ANALYSIS: TECHNIQUES

Basically, three methods are available for determining dynamic properties: free oscillation,
forced oscillation, and steady-state rotation. Experimental and analytical details for the first
two are reviewed extensively by Ferry [7].
16.5.1

Free Oscillation

16.5.1.1 Torsion Pendulum Free-oscillation measurements are made with a
torsion pendulum (Figure 16.7). The sample is given an initial torsional displacement,
and the frequency and amplitude decay of the oscillations are observed on release. G0 is
determined from the sample geometry, moment of inertia of the oscillating mechanism, and
the observed period of oscillation. For example, with a cylindrical specimen of length L and
radius R,
0

G ¼

8pLI
R4 P2

ð16:9Þ

where I is the moment of inertia of the oscillating mechanism and P is the observed period
of oscillation (P ¼ 2p/v). The damping or logarithmic decrement D is calculated from the
amplitude decay of the oscillations (with a perfectly elastic material, there would be no
damping of the oscillations):
D ¼ ln

A1
A2
Ai
1
Ai
¼ ln ¼ ln
¼ ln
A2
A3
Aiþ1 n Aiþn

ð16:10Þ

and for D < 1:
D  ptand

ð16:11Þ

Expressions for other specimen geometries and higher damping are reviewed by
Nielson [9]. Solid or rubbery samples are twisted as illustrated in the form of rods, tubes,
strips, etc. Liquids or soft solids may be contained in one of the geometries described for
rotational viscometry earlier (Couette, cone-and-plate, etc.).

DYNAMIC MECHANICAL ANALYSIS: TECHNIQUES

317

FIGURE 16.7 Torsion pendulum with its output [8].

16.5.1.2 Torsional Braid Analysis In torsional braid analysis [10], a flexible,
braided fiber, usually glass, is impregnated with the material to be studied. The
impregnated fiber then becomes the torsion member in the pendulum. This type of
device is useful for following the cure of a material that starts out as a liquid and
cures to a solid (e.g., an epoxy). In analyzing the data from such a device, care must be
exercised in separating interactions between the sample and the supporting fiber.
Although the frequency can be varied somewhat by changing the moment of inertia of the
oscillating portion of the mechanism, torsion pendulums are usually intended to study only
the temperature dependence of dynamic properties at a constant, relatively low frequency
( 1 cycle/s). On the other hand, they are inexpensive and rather simple to construct.
16.5.2

Forced Oscillation Devices

16.5.2.1 Dynamic Mechanical Analyzers DMAs are forced-oscillation devices
(“jiggle machines”) that apply a sinusoidal stress or strain of known amplitude and
frequency and measure the resulting strain or stress. The dynamic properties are
calculated from the relation between the two. Solid materials are clamped into a DMA

318

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

FIGURE 16.8 Dynamic mechanical analysis testing clamps (used with permission from TA
Instruments, New Castle, DE). Different clamp setups can be used for tension, compression,
three-point bending, and shear tests. The application of stress (or strain) is sinusoidal.

(Figure 16.8), where the cyclic load (stress or strain) can be applied, with the resulting
strain or stress measured. For liquid samples, the geometries discussed in conjunction with
rotational viscometry are often used with the drive system modified to produce sinusoidal
rather than steady rotational deformation. Flexible samples such as fibers, films, and rubber
are preloaded in tension and oscillated about a positive tensile strain so that they do not go
slack at the “bottom” of the sine wave. Such tests give dynamic tensile properties, E0 , E00 ,
etc., which are related to the corresponding shear properties by
jE* j ¼ 2jG* jð1 þ vÞ

ð16:12Þ

where n is Poisson’s ratio (n ¼ 1/2 for an incompressible material). Another type of forcedoscillation device applies a sinusoidal shear or compression wave to one end of a sample
and monitors the attenuation of the wave as it progresses through the sample.
Forced-oscillation devices are generally intended to study dynamic properties as a
function of frequency as well as temperature. Drive and detection systems for such devices
may be strictly mechanical, but more sophisticated ones make use of piezoelectric crystals
and, inorganic crystals (e.g., barium titanate) that change dimension in proportion to an
applied voltage and, conversely, generate an output voltage proportional to an imposed
deformation. Thus, the amplitude and, especially, the frequency of the applied strain can be
conveniently controlled over a wide range in the form of electrical signals (the response of
the crystals extends to very high frequencies, and electrons have very little inertia, unlike
mechanical linkages). Input and output signals may be fed to a computer for online control
and computations.
16.5.3

Steady Rotation Methods

The expense and complexity of oscillating devices and associated detection systems has led
to the increased popularity of instruments that determine dynamic properties, but are driven
in steady rotation and detect steady (nonoscillating) forces. This sounds like a contradiction

DYNAMIC MECHANICAL ANALYSIS: TECHNIQUES

319

in terms, but they really do work! We will attempt to describe the operation of one of the
more popular of them. Mathematical details are provided in elegant fashion by
Walters [11].
16.5.3.1 Orthogonal Rheometry In the Maxwell orthogonal rheometer [12]
(Figure 16.9), material is sheared between two parallel disks of radius R, separated
from one another by a distance h, each rotating at the same steady angular frequency
v, but with their axes of rotation displaced by a distance d. Transducers are set up to
measure three steady, orthogonal force components (hence, the name) on one of the disks,
Fx, Fy, and Fz.
How, you ask, does this result in oscillating deformation? Well, the easiest way to see is
to follow the motion of a point on the upper disk (point 2), relative to one on the lower disk
(point 1) as the disks rotate. Here, we choose point 1 on the axis of rotation (center) of the
lower disk and point 2 directly above it at the start of the analysis, vt ¼ 0. This is the
simplest choice, because point 1 remains stationary, but the same result will be obtained for
any pair of points initially at the same values of x and y (you can prove this with a compass,
ruler, and protractor). Figure 16.10a shows the relative displacement vector in the xy plane,

w

w

R

+

y

R

x
z
w

h

d
w

FIGURE 16.9 Orthogonal rheometer.

320

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

3p
—
2

o

i

d

p

y

1

y

p-wt wt
——
2

d

(wt)
2

2

p
—
2

x

x
(a)

(b)

FIGURE 16.10 Analysis of the orthogonal rheometer: (a) relative displacement vector between
point 1 on the center of the lower disk and point 2 immediately above it at vt ¼ 0; (b) geometry of the
displacement vector and its components.

l, and how it varies with the angle of rotation vt. From Figure 16.10b, the magnitude of the
relative displacement is then:
vt
2

ð16:13Þ

lx ¼ d sinðvtÞ

ð16:14Þ

p vt

¼ d ½1  cosðvtÞ
2 2

ð16:15Þ

jlj ¼ 2d sin
and its x and y components are

and
ly ¼ jlj cos

If we assume that the strain is simply the relative displacement divided by the disk
separation h, the x and y components of strain are3
d
sinðvtÞ
h

ð16:16Þ

d
½1  cos ðvtÞ
h

ð16:17Þ

yx ¼

yx ¼

Thus, both components of strain undergo simple harmonic oscillation as a result of the
steady angular rotation.
3
This requires that each fluid element move at fixed z in a circle that is centered on a line connecting the centers
of the disks. There has been some controversy about this, but it is probably at least a good approximation for
d/h < 0.5.

321

DYNAMIC MECHANICAL ANALYSIS: TECHNIQUES

It is important to note that the x component of strain is symmetrical about 0, while the y
component is not (it varies between 0 and þ 2d/h). For linear materials, because stress is
directly proportional to strain, any shear stresses and, therefore, forces parallel to the xy
plane produced by g x’s in the region 0 < vt < p will be cancelled by those arising from the
equal-and-opposite x-component strains in the region (p < vt < 2p). As a result, the
measured forces Fx and Fy can depend only on g y.
Looking at it another way, consider a purely elastic material in the rheometer to be
represented by rubber bands stretched between points 1 and 2. Viewed from above, the
rubber bands coincide with 1. It is obvious that the x components of the tug of the rubber
bands will cancel, leaving only a net force (and, therefore, only a stress component t zy) in
the y direction. Thus, the purely elastic stress is in phase with gy, so Equation 16.17
represents the variation of g 0 with location in a disk as constant z, that is,
d
½1  cosðvtÞ
h

_gðvtÞ ¼ g y ðvtÞ ¼

ð16:18Þ

and
0

0

0

t zy ¼ t ¼ t ðg Þ

ð16:19Þ

Any measured value of Fx, therefore, must arise from a viscous component, whose stress
t zx will be 90 out of phase with g y, that is,
00

0

t zx ¼ t ðg Þ

ð16:20Þ

To determine the total force component on a disk, the stress-area product must be
integrated over the surface of the disk:
ð

0

Fy ¼

t dA

ð16:21Þ

surface of disk

From Equation 15.37, t0 ¼G0 g0 and, in polar coordinates, dA ¼ r d(vt) dr, so that
0

Fy ¼ G

  ð R ð 2x
 
d
d
0
½1  cosðvtÞ dðvtÞ r dr ¼ pR2
G
h 0 0
h

ð16:22Þ

h=d
Fy
pR2

ð16:23Þ

or
0

G ¼
Similarly,
ð

00

Fx ¼

t dA
surface of disk

ð16:24Þ

322

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

and since t 00 ¼ G00 g0 (Eq. 15.38), it follows that
00

G ¼

h=d
Fx
pR2

ð16:25Þ

Equations 16.23 and 16.25 show how dynamic properties can be obtained from a device
in steady rotation by measuring steady forces, which mechanically and analytically
represents a great simplification over forced-oscillation techniques. It must be pointed
out that there have been some questions as to whether a nonviscometric flow such as this
can be used to determine quantities such as G0 , G00 , h0 , h00 , which are really defined in terms
of viscometric deformations, but it is now pretty generally agreed that the technique is
valid, at least in the limit of small strains, d/h [13,14].
Also, analyses are based on the assumption that both disks rotate at the same angular
velocity, v. In the usual instrument, one disk is driven and the other goes along for the ride;
so with bearing friction and hydrodynamic effects, the assumption might not be strictly
true. An analysis by Davis and Macosko [15] shows it to be a pretty good assumption under
most conditions of interest.
16.5.3.2 Other Steady Rotation Devices Other devices have been developed that
operate along similar lines. The so-called balance rheometer confines a test fluid between
two concentric hemispheres that rotate at the same rate but whose axes of rotation are at an
angle to one another. Similarly, cone-and-plate geometry, in which the axis of the cone is
not perpendicular to the plate, and Couette (cup-and-bob) geometry, with the bob not
centered on the cup, can also be used to obtain dynamic data [11]. Dynamic tensile
properties can be obtained for relatively rigid materials by subjecting a rotating cylindrical
rod to a cantilever deflection [16].
Many of these dynamic tests can also be used to determine the thermal behavior of
polymers. Figure 16.11 illustrates G0 and damping  p tan d versus. T for poly(methyl
methacrylate), an amorphous, linear polymer. The data were obtained with a torsion
pendulum at about 1 cycle/s. At low temperatures, the typical glassy modulus 1–10 GPa is
observed. In the vicinity of 110–130  C, G0 drops precipitously, ultimately reaching a
plateau of 0.1–1 MPa, the typical rubbery modulus. Also, a sharp peak in the damping is
observed in this region. Although the temperature at which this peak and drop are observed
is frequency dependent, at low frequencies (such as obtained with the usual torsion
pendulum), they are identified with the material’s glass transition temperature, and the drop
in G0 is indicative of the decrease in “stiffness” at Tg, going from the straining of bond
angles and lengths to coiling and uncoiling as the dominant response mechanism. The
damping peak represents the onset of cooperative motion of 40–50 main-chain carbon
atoms at Tg (Chapter 6).
In terms of the four-parameter model for viscoelasticity, below Tg, only spring 1 is
operative, and the material is almost completely elastic (low damping). In the vicinity of Tg,
the viscosity of dashpot 2 drops to the point where it can deform and dissipate energy,
giving the damping peak. At higher temperatures, its viscosity drops to the point where it
dissipates little energy, and the material is again highly elastic, mainly through spring 2. At
still higher temperatures, the modulus drops off rapidly due to viscous flow, dashpot 1. The
broad damping “hill” centered at about 40  C (and the accompanying gradual drop in G0 ) in
Figure 16.11 has been shown to arise from the motion of the -CO-O-CH3 side groups on the
PMMA molecules.

TIME–TEMPERATURE SUPERPOSITION

323

1010

1.0

109

0.1

108
-50

-20

10

40
70
Temperature (ºC)

100

130

Damping (log decrement)

G′ shear modulus (dynes/cm2)

1011

160

FIGURE 16.11 Dynamic mechanical properties of poly(methyl methacrylate) [8]. The data were
obtained with a torsion pendulum at about 1 cycle/s.

Note that the dimensions of the angular frequency v are per time. The angular frequency
thus corresponds to a reciprocal timescale. For dynamic (oscillating) deformations, then,
the Deborah number is
De ¼ lc v

ð16:26Þ

In dynamic tests, a viscoelastic material becomes more like solid as the frequency is
increased and the time-dependent response mechanisms (coiling and uncoiling, slip) are
less able to follow the rapidly reversing stress. In the limit of very high frequencies, the
straining of bond angles and lengths will be the only operative response mechanism and the
polymer will exhibit the typical glassy modulus even though it may be well above its glass
transition temperature.
16.6

TIME–TEMPERATURE SUPERPOSITION

One of the big challenges in developing materials that are expected to have a lifetime of
years is developing laboratory tests to prove that the materials will last. One way to
accelerate aging is to conduct tests at higher temperatures. Anyone who has ever wrestled

324

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

with a cheap garden hose in cold weather appreciates the fact that polymers become stiffer
and more rigid at lower temperatures, while at high temperatures they are softer and more
flexible. In preceding examples, we have seen that the timescale (or frequency) of the
application of stress has a similar influence on mechanical properties, short times (or high
frequencies) corresponding to low temperatures and long times (low frequencies) corresponding to high temperatures. The quantitative application of this idea, time–temperature
superposition, is one of the most important principles in polymer physics. It is based on the
fact that the Deborah number determines quantitatively just how a viscoelastic material
will behave mechanically. Changing either ts (or v) or lc can change De. The nature of the
applied deformation determines ts (or v), while a polymer’s characteristic time is a
function of temperature. The higher the temperature, the more thermal energy the chain
segments possess and the more rapidly they are able to respond, lowering lc. Thus, e.g., De
can be doubled by halving ts (or doubling v in a dynamic test) or by lowering the
temperature enough to double lc. The change in mechanical response will be the same
either way, according to the time–temperature superposition principle.
Although time–temperature superposition is applicable to any viscoelastic response test
(creep, dynamic, etc.), here, we will focus on its application to stress relaxation.
Figure 16.12 shows tensile stress relaxation data at various temperatures for polyisobutylene, plotted in the form of a time-dependent tensile (Young’s) modulus Er(t) versus. time
on a log–log scale:
Er ðtÞ ¼

sðtÞ f ðtÞ=A
¼
«0
Dl=l

ð16:27Þ

where f(t) is the measured tensile force in the sample held at a constant strain «o ¼ Dl/l and
A is its cross-sectional area. The technique is, of course, equally applicable to shear
deformation. In stress relaxation, the lower measurement time limit is set by the assumption

Data

1010

-80.8

108
107
106

4
0

-76.7
-74.1
-70.6
Glossy
-65.4
region
-58.8
-49.6
-40.1
0
+25

105
104

log aT

T

E t (t) dynes/cm2

1011

109

Temperature
shift factor, aT

8

-40
0
40
Temperature (ºC)
Master curve,
25 ºC
Leathery
region

Rubbery
plateou
Flow

+50

10-2 100 102

10-14 10-12 10-10 10-8 10-6 10-4 10-2 100 10+2

tt (h)

t25 = tt /aT

FIGURE 16.12 Time–temperature superposition for NBS polyisobutylene. Adapted from Tobolsky
and Catsiff [17].

TIME–TEMPERATURE SUPERPOSITION

325

that the constant strain is applied instantaneously. In practice, inertia and other mechanical
limitations make this impossible, so data are valid only at times an order of magnitude or so
longer than it actually takes to apply the constant strain. The upper limit is set by the
dedication (and patience) of the experimenter and the long-term stability of the sample and
equipment. These data were obtained over a range of seconds to a couple of days. As might
be expected, the modulus drops with time at a given temperature, and at a given time, it
drops with increasing temperature.
Staring at the curves for a while indicates that they appear to be sections of one
continuous curve, chopped up, with the sections displaced along the log-time axis. That this
is indeed so is shown in Figure 16.12. Here, 25  C has arbitrarily been chosen as a reference
temperature To and the curves for other temperatures have been shifted along the log time
axis to line up with it. The data below 25  C are shifted to the left (shorter times) and those
above 25  C are shifted to the right (longer times), giving a master curve at 25  C.
Sometimes, the relaxation moduli at each temperature T are corrected to the reference
temperature To by multiplying be the ratio To/T before superimposing. This correction is
based on the theory of ideal rubber elasticity (Chapter 13), which states that the modulus is
proportional to the absolute temperature. This procedure is, however, open to question.
Although ideal rubber elasticity might be a reasonable approximation when the major
response mechanism is chain coiling and uncoiling, it certainly is not where response is
dominated by straining of bond angles and lengths (glassy region) or molecular slippage
(viscous flow region). In any event, such corrections are of minor practical significance.
Shifting a constant-temperature curve along the log-time axis corresponds to dividing
every value of its abscissa by a constant factor (it is immaterial what kind of scale is used
for the ordinate). This constant factor, which brings a curve at a particular temperature T
into alignment with the one at the reference temperature To, is known as the temperature
shift factor aT:
aT ¼

tT
tTo

ðfor same responseÞ

ð16:28Þ

where tT is the time required to reach a particular response (Er in this case) at temperature
T and tTo is the time required to reach the same response at the reference temperature To.
The time value for each relaxation datum on the abscissa of the master curve is from
Equation 16.28 or tTo ¼ tT /aT.
For temperatures above the reference temperature, it takes less time to reach a particular
response (the material responds faster, i.e., has a shorter relaxation time), so aT is less than
one, and vice versa for temperatures below the reference temperature. The logarithm of the
experimentally determined temperature shift factor is plotted as a function of temperature
in the inset graph of Figure 16.12.
The master curve now represents stress relaxation at 25  C over 17 decades of time.
Since tTo ¼ tT /aT, multiplication by the appropriate value of aT (shifting along the log-time
axis) establishes the master curve at any other temperature T, and can thus be used to
predict material responses at that temperature over 17 decades of time.
Two additional aspects enhance the utility of the time–temperature superposition
concept. First, the same temperature shift factors apply to a particular polymer regardless
of the nature of the mechanical response, that is, the shift factors as determined in stress
relaxation are applicable to the prediction of the time–temperature behavior in creep or
dynamic testing. Second, if the polymer’s glass transition temperature is chosen as the

326

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

reference temperature, the shift factors are given by the Williams–Landel–Ferry (WLF)
equation in the range Tg < T < (Tg þ 100 K):
log aT ¼

C1 ðT  T * Þ
C2 þ ðT  T * Þ

ðfor To ¼ Tg Þ

ð16:29Þ

With T* ¼ Tg, the “universal” constants C1 ¼ 17.44 and C2 ¼ 51.6 (with T ’s in K) give a
rough fit for a wide variety of polymers. The WLF equation is most useful in this form
because Tg is extensively tabulated [18]. Better fits can be obtained by using constants C1,
C2, and T* specific to the polymer, but these constants are not readily available. It has also
been suggested that the fit can be improved by using C1 ¼ 8.86 and C2 ¼ 101.6, with T*
adjusted to fit specific data, if available. When this is done, T* generally turns out to be
Tg þ (50  5) K [19].
Example 16.5 The damping peak for poly(methyl methacrylate) in Figure 16.11 is located
at 130  C. Assuming the data were obtained at a frequency of 1 cycle/s, at what temperature
would the peak be located if measurements were made at 1000 cycles/s? For PMMA,
Tg ¼ 105  C.
Solution. Keep in mind that frequency is a reciprocal timescale, and therefore aT ¼ vTo/vT.
Applying the WLF equation with the “universal” constants gives
log aT ¼ log

vT 17:44ðT  Tg Þ
¼
vT 51:6 þ ðT  Tg Þ

Shifting the measurements at 1 cycle/s to Tg (i.e., finding the frequency at which the peak
would be located at Tg) gives
log

v105  C 17:44ð130  5:69Þ
¼
¼ 5:69
v130  C
51:6 þ ð130  105Þ
v105  C =v130  C ¼ 2:03  106

and
v105  C ¼ ð1 cpsÞð2:03  106 Þ ¼ 2:03  106 cps
Now, shifting from Tg to T:

log

2:03  106
17:44ðT  105Þ
¼ 8:69 ¼
1000
51:6 þ T  105

T ¼ 156 C

This quantitatively illustrates the statements made at the end of Section 16.4.

TIME–TEMPERATURE SUPERPOSITION

327

Example 16.6 The master curve for the polyisobutylene in Figure 16.12 indicates that
stress relaxes to a modulus of 106 dyn/cm2 in about 10 h at 25  C. Using the WLF equation,
estimate the time it will take to reach the same modulus at a temperature of 20  C. For
PIB, Tg ¼ 70  C.
Solution. To use the WLF equation, the reference temperature must be Tg ¼ 70  C:
log
log

tT
t25  C
17:44ð25  70Þ
¼ log
¼
¼ 11:3
t Tg
t70  C
51:6 þ 25  70

t25  C
10
¼ 5:01  1012 and t70  C ¼
¼ 2  1012 h
t70  C
5:01  1012
log

t20  C 17:44ð20 þ 70Þ
¼ 8:59
¼
t70  C
51:6  20 þ 70

t20  C =t70  C ¼ 2:57  109
t20  C ¼ ð2  1012 Þð2:57  109 Þ ¼ 5140 h
This shows how lowering the temperature maintains mechanical “stiffness” for much
longer periods of time.

Let us take a closer look at the stress–relaxation master curve. The one shown in Figure 16.12
is typical of linear, amorphous polymers, and illustrates the five regions of viscoelastic
behavior [20]. At low temperatures, or short times (large De), only bond angles and lengths
can respond, and so the typical glassy modulus of 1010–1011 dyn/cm2 (1–10 GPa) is observed.
This is the so-called glassy region. At longer times or higher temperatures, the relaxation
response is governed by the uncoiling of the chains, with the characteristic modulus
106–107 dyn/cm2 (0.1–1 MPa) in the rubbery plateau. The intermediate region, where the
modulus drops because of glassy to rubbery, is sometimes known as the leathery region
because of the leather-like feel of materials with moduli in this range. At still longer times or
higher temperatures (low De), the modulus drops from the rubbery plateau into the rubberyflow region, where the material is still quite elastic but has a significant flow component and
then falls off rapidly as a result of molecular slippage in the viscous-flow region (this last
distinction is somewhat artificial; usually by this time (or temperature), the polymer is
significantly deformed and for many polymers (and all thermosets) degradation begins before
the polymer can flow).
Figure 16.13 illustrates the effects of molecular weight and crosslinking on the stress–
relaxation master curve. Molecular weight should have no significant influence on
straining of bond angles and lengths or on uncoiling, so the glassy and rubbery moduli
are unchanged for these regions. Flow, however, is severely retarded by increasing
molecular weight, which extends the rubbery plateau. For very low molecular weight
polymers, the rubbery plateau is not even seen (they are liquids at room temperature). In
the limit of infinite molecular weight (light crosslinking), flow is entirely eliminated and
the curve levels off with the rubbery modulus. Higher degrees of crosslinking restrict
uncoiling, ultimately leading to a material that responds only by straining of bond angles
and lengths.

328

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

Very highly crosslinked

log Er (t)

Increased
crosslinking

Lightly crosslinked

Increasing
mol. wt.

log (time) or temperature

FIGURE 16.13
curves.

The effects of molecular weight and crosslinking on stress–relaxation master

The effects of crystallinity on properties are similar to those of crosslinking. However,
the applicability of time–temperature superposition in and across the region of Tm is open
to question. In this region, the degree of crystallinity and crystalline morphology may
change, and one would be, in effect, superimposing data for different materials. A second,
vertical shift has been suggested to help superimpose data for crystalline polymers.
To illustrate the effect of temperature on mechanical properties, it is sometimes
preferable to plot the property versus temperature for constant values of time. For example,
data of the type shown in Figure 16.12 may be cross-plotted as Er[10] (the 10-s relaxation
modulus) versus T. Such a plot is given in Figure 16.14 for several polystyrene

11
10
log Er (10), dynes/cm2

Crystalline

9
8
Crosslinked

7
6

(A)

(C)

5
4
50

100

150
Temperature, ºC

200

250

FIGURE 16.14 The 10-s tensile relaxation modulus Er[10] versus temperature for several
polystyrenes [20]. Samples (A) and (C) are linear, amorphous (atactic) materials with narrow
 n (C) ¼ 217,000. The crosslinked sample is also
 n (A) ¼ 140,000; M
molecular weight distributions. M
amorphous. The crystalline material is isotactic.

PROBLEMS

329

samples [20]. The five regions of viscoelastic behavior are evident in the linear, amorphous
(atactic) samples (A) and (C) along with the effect of molecular weight in the flow region.
The drop in modulus in the vicinity of Tg (100  C) is clearly seen. The crystalline (isotactic)
sample maintains a fairly high modulus all the way up to Tm ( 235  C). Given values of aT,
one can convert data in the form Er versus. t at constant T (a master curve) to Er versus T at
constant t and vice versa.

16.7

SUMMARY

Material testing for polymers can be rather complex. Thus, a number of different methods
is required for determining the mechanical properties of polymers when subjected to
deformations, either glassy, rubbery, or solid (or even during a temperature ramp). A
number of viscometers can be used to accurately determine the behavior of polymer
solutions and melts, while dynamic mechanical analysis is used to determine the behavior
of polymers to cyclic stresses, with the moduli separated into storage (or elastic) moduli
and loss (or viscous) moduli. The time–temperature superposition principle is a valuable
technique to take measurements for polymers at higher temperatures to estimate the
behavior of a polymer sample at lower temperatures over long periods of time. The modern
polymer characterization laboratory has rheometers, viscometers, dynamic mechanical
analyzers, and techniques mentioned in earlier chapters such as differential scanning
calorimeters and gel permeation chromatographs (or other equipment to measure molecular weights).
PROBLEMS
1

Data were collected from a mechanical stress/strain test on a strip of plastic, as below.
The strip was initially 5 cm long, with a width of 1.40 mm and 0.20 mm thickness,
when it was placed under axial tension.

Sample Length, cm
5.00
5.03
5.08
5.12
5.23
5.25
5.29
5.33
5.36
5.39

(a)

Force, N
0.0
6.8
14.3
22.0
41.0
38.0
39.5
41.5
42.5
44.9

Plot the stress–strain curve and determine the ultimate stress, yield stress, and the
elastic modulus.

330

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

(b)

Draw a qualitative line on the same plot to show how a highly crystalline sample
of the same polymer would behave.

2

By stretching, an initial biaxial stress of 0.76 MPa is placed on a rectangular polymer
sample and is shown to decrease to 0.55 MPa in 133 days.
(a) What is the relaxation time for this rubbery polymer?
(b) Estimate how many days it will take for the stress to relax to 0.30 MPa.

3

An initial stress of 10.4 MPa is placed on a piece of rubber to strain it 50%. After the
strain has been maintained for 40 days, the stress required is only 5.2 MPa. What stress
will be required to hold the strain after 80 days?

4

The following data were obtained by Dr. N.D. Sylvester (Ph.D. thesis, Carnegie
Institute of Technology, 1968) in the “world’s largest capillary viscometer,” an 8 ft
long, 1/2-in-inner diameter tube equipped with pressure taps to measure the pressure
gradient down the tube. The fluid was a 1.34% solution of poly(ethylene oxide)
in water.
Q, in3/s

DPtotal psi

DPent psi

2.10
3.11
3.49
4.48
5.04
6.16
7.87
10.74
14.31
15.49
15.85
20.13
23.35
29.09

1.898
2.510
2.732
2.947
3.330
3.599
4.238
4.965
6.046
6.249
6.451
7.597
8.670
10.130

0.036
0.039
0.081
0.082
0.123
0.132
0.211
0.341
0.620
0.675
0.726
1.183
1.607
2.335

Here, DPtotal is the total pressure drop across the tube and DPent is the above-equilibrium
pressure loss caused by entrance effects.
(a) Obtain the flow equation for this fluid, with constants in the CGS system. Note
that at the higher flow rates, entrance losses are a significant portion of the total
pressure drop.
(b) Check the Reynolds number at the highest flow rate to make sure the data are in
laminar flow.
5

Show that the shear rate in Couette flow between two concentric cylinders is given by:
g_ ¼ r
where v ¼ vr is the tangential velocity.

d y  
dr r

PROBLEMS

331

6

Consider Couette flow between two concentric cylinders, the outer one at Ro fixed and
the inner one at Ri rotating with a tangential velocity v (Ri). Starting with Equation 16.2 and the equation in Problem 16.5, obtain an expression for the dimensionless
tangential velocity profile v(r)/v(Ri), for a power-law fluid. Write your expression in
terms of the dimensionless quantities r/Ri, Ro/Ri, and the flow index n. Plot v(r)/v(Ri)
versus r/Ri for Ro/Ri ¼ 2 and n ¼ 1, 1/2, and 1/4.

7

A cylindrical shaft of radius Ri and weight W slides vertically downward through a
fixed bearing of inner radius Ro and length L. Assume that the shaft remains centered
in the bearing and that the annulus between them is filled with a power-law fluid.
Neglect entrance and exit effects.
(a) Is the flow in the annulus viscometric? If so, clearly identify the 1, 2, and 3
coordinate directions.
(b) Obtain an expression for the shear-stress distribution in the annulus t(r).
(c) Obtain an expression for the velocity profile in the annulus.
(d) Obtain an expression for V, the steady-state velocity with which the shaft falls
through the bearing.

8

Consider the experiment in which the pressure drop DP is measured as a function of
volumetric flow rate Q through a cylindrical tube of length L and inner radius R. Entrance
and exit effects are negligible. The data may be summarized over a limited range of Q by:
DP ¼ AQ  BQ2
where A and B are positive constants.
(a) Obtain an expression for the zero-shear viscosity of the fluid in terms of
geometry and quantities in the above equation.
(b) Show how would you obtain the true shear stress–shear rate relation (flow curve)
from the above data.

9

A power-law fluid is confined between two parallel, flat plates in simple shearing flow.
The lower plate is fixed and the upper plate moves with a velocity V. The plates are
separated by a distance d. Calculate and sketch the velocity profiles for n ¼ 0.5, n ¼ 1,
and n ¼ 1.5.

10

Injection molding consists of forcing a heated thermoplastic into a cooled mold. It has
been noticed that short shots (material freezing before the mold is filled) can
sometimes be cured by forcing the material through a smaller gate (narrower diameter
entrance to the mold). In fact, so-called “pin gates” (very small orifices at the mold
entrance) seem very effective at this. Why?

11

Dynamic measurements taken on a polymer solution at a frequency 1 radian/s give
values of G0 ¼ 5.0  103 Pa and G00 ¼ 2.0  103 Pa. On the basis of these data, what
quantitative statement (if any) can you make about the steady-state viscosity of this
material at the same temperature?

12

A particular polystyrene sample shows a 10 s relaxation modulus Er(10) of 1.0  107
Pa at 100  C. Estimate how long would it take for this same sample to reach the same
modulus at a temperature of 115  C. Tg ¼ 100  C.

332

POLYMER MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

13

Construct a master curve log Er(t) versus log t for the linear polystyrene sample (C) in
Figure 16.14. Assume that the shift factors are given by the WLF equation with the
“universal” constants. Tg ¼ 100  C.

14

The Kepes balance rheometer is another device that determines dynamic properties in
steady rotation. Material is confined between concentric hemispheres whose axes of
rotation form an angle . Both hemispheres rotate with the same angular velocity v.
Ro  Ri ¼ d « Ri and  is small.
(a) Obtain an expression for the shear strain in this device.
(b) A polymer melt is tested in such a device. Do you think the forces that arise (if
any) will tend to increase, decrease, or not influence ?

15

Dynamic measurements on a sample of poly(ethyl procrastinate) (PEP), give G0 ¼
1.0  107 Pa at Tg þ 20  C and a frequency of 1 cycle/s. At what frequency would this
sample have the same G0 at a temperature of Tg þ 40  C?

16

Crud Chemicals is enviously noticing the market for Tygon flexible tubing. They
have developed a linear, amorphous polymer with Tg ¼ 10  C, which they think may
be a good competitor in this market. Their polymer has excellent clarity and chemical
resistance, but they are not too sure about its mechanical suitability.
To check it out mechanically, they extrude some tubing and subject it to rupture
tests at 20  C. These tests consist of taking a fixed length of tubing, pressurizing it to
50 psi, and determining the average burst time for a large number of samples. The
average life of their specimens turns out to be 40 h at 20  C.
(a) To what common laboratory test of viscoelasticity does this test most closely
correspond?
(b) Estimate the average life of the same tubing in the same rupture test at 30  C and
37  C.

17

Figure 15.6 crudely illustrates the effect of strain rate on the engineering stress–strain
test of a viscoelastic material at constant temperature.
(a) Make a similar qualitative sketch that illustrates the effect of temperature at
constant strain rate.
(b) A stress–strain test is run on a sample of poly(vinyl acetate), Tg ¼ 24  C at
_«0 ¼ 1’s The initial slope (Young’s modulus) is 5000 psi. At a temperature of
30  C, what would _«0 have to be to give again an initial modulus of 5000 psi?

18

The 25  C master curve in Figure 16.12 extends over the time range from about 1014 to
10þ2 h. What approximate time range would the master curve at To ¼ 40  C cover?

19

Given the statement that a polymer’s mechanical behavior depends on the Deborah
number, how is the material’s characteristic time lc related to its temperature shift
factor aT?

REFERENCES
[1] Lendlein, A., A.M. Schmidt, and R. Langer, PNAS 98 (3), 842 (2001).
[2] Collyer, A.A. and D.W. Clegg (eds), Rheological Measurement, Elsevier, New York, 1988.

REFERENCES

333

[3] Dealy, J.M., Rheometers for Molten Plastics, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1982.
[4] Bird, R.B., W.E. Stewart, and E.N. Lightfoot, Transport Phenomena, Wiley, New York, 1960,
p. 94, Example 3.5-1.
[5] Krieger, I.M. and S.H. Maron, J. Appl. Phys. 25, 72 (1954).
[6] Best, D.M. and S.L. Rosen, Polym. Eng. Sci. 8 (2), 116 (1968).
[7] Ferry, J.D., Viscoelastic Properties of Polymers, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 1980.
[8] Nielsen, L.E., SPE J. 16, 525 (1960).
[9] Nielsen, L.E., Mechanical Properties of Polymers and Composites, Vol. 1, Dekker, New York,
1974.
[10] Gillham, J.K., Am. Inst. Chem. Eng. J. 20, 1066 (1974).
[11] Walters, K., Rheometry, Halsted, New York, 1975.
[12] Maxwell, B. and R.P. Chartoff, Trans. Soc. Rheol., 9, 41 (1965).
[13] Bird, R.B. and E.K. Harris, Am. Inst. Chem. Eng. J. 14, 758 (1968).
[14] Macosko, C.W. and W.M. Davis, Rheol. Acta 13, 814 (1974).
[15] Davis, W.M. and C.W. Macosko, Am. Inst. Chem. Eng. J. 20, 600 (1974).
[16] Maxwell, B., J. Polym. Sci. 20, 551 (1956).
[17] Tobolsky, A.V. and E. Catsiff, J. Polym. Sci. 19, 111 (1956).
[18] Brandrup, J. and E.H. Immergut (eds), Polymer Handbook, 3rd ed., Wiley-Interscience,
New York, 1989.
[19] Bird, R.B., R.C. Armstrong, and O.A. Hassager, Dynamics of Polymeric Liquids, Vol. 1, Fluid
Mechanics, Wiley, New York, 1977.
[20] Tobolsky, A.V., Properties and Structure of Polymers, Wiley, New York, 1960.

PART IV

POLYMER PROCESSING AND
PERFORMANCE

This final part of the book covers how we get from producing and testing polymers to the
processing methods used to make useful polymeric products, the additives that are often
used, and includes a discussion of some of the challenges encountered in the various
markets for polymeric materials. The thermal and mechanical behavior of polymers
influences the selection of processing techniques. This section addresses the equipment
used to transform polymers into a variety of useful forms including molded shapes, fibers,
tubes, and thin (and very thin) sheets as well as a range of application areas for polymers,
including thermoplastics, surface finishes, synthetic fibers, adhesives, and rubbers.

Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
Ó 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

335

CHAPTER 17

PROCESSING

17.1

INTRODUCTION

In earlier chapters, we have discovered how to synthesize and characterize polymers.
But how do we get the preponderance of polymeric products commonly manufactured?
Here, we discuss polymer processing, which describes the technology used to convert raw
polymer, or compounds containing raw polymer, to articles of a desired shape and size.
Considering the wide variety of polymer types and the even wider variety of articles made
from them, a complete description and analysis of the myriad of processing techniques that
have sprung up through the years would be impossible here. There are references that
provide detailed qualitative descriptions of polymer-processing operations [1–4] and many
websites that provide photographs or videos of these operations. Similarly, quantitative
treatment of processing operations has been the subject of a number of books [5–10]. Here,
we outline some of the common processing techniques (Table 17.1), introduce terminology, and consider how the various techniques are based on fundamentals previously
discussed. The reader wishing additional detail may consult these references and the more
specialized ones cited in the sections to follow.
17.2

MOLDING

Molding consists of confining a material in the fluid state in a mold where it solidifies,
taking the shape of the mold cavity. Injection molding [11,12] is the most common means
of fabricating thermoplastic articles. Figure 17.1 illustrates a typical injection press. The
molding compound, usually in the form of pellets of approximately 1/8-in. (3-mm) cubes or
1/8-in.-long cylinders (molding “powder”) is fed from a hopper (which may be heated with
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

337

338

PROCESSING

TABLE 17.1 Polymer Processing Techniques
Processing Technique
Injection molding
(Section 17.2)
Foam molding
(Section 17.2)

Reaction injection
molding (Section 17.2)

Extrusion (Section 17.3)

Blow extrusion
(Section 17.3)
Blow molding (either
injection or extrusion)
(Section 17.4)
Rotational molding
(fluidized bed or slush)
(Section 17.5)
Calendering
(Section 17.6)

Thermoforming
(Section 17.7)
Stamping (Section 17.8)
Solution casting
(Section 17.9)
Casting and crosslinking
(Section 17.10)
Reinforced thermoset
molding (Section 17.11)

Fiber spinning
(Section 17.12)

Compounding
(Section 17.13)

Brief Description

Example Products

Molten polymer injected into metal
mold; solidifies by cooling
Molten polymer with volatile
blowing agent that expands the
polymer as it evaporates or
degrades, producing a gas
Starting prepolymers (usually
condensation-type) are injected
into a heated mold, where they
react
Molten polymer is extruded through
an opening with a cross-sectional
shape matching the desired
product
Forms very thin sheets by expanding
extruded cylindrical sheets with
pressurized air before rolling
A parison of molten polymer is
formed inside a mold, then filled
with air to form the hollow insides
Powdered polymer is put in a heated
mold that is rotated to melt the
polymer into the desired shape
Polymer sheets are pulled and
stretched between heated metal
rolls (produces larger than 0.01 in.
thick)
A polymer sheet is heated and forced
into a cooled mold; vacuum can be
used
Heated thin thermoplastic sheets
stamped into a mold
Polymer dissolved in solvent which
evaporates leaving a thin film
Monomers or pre-polymers are cast
into a mold and set by a
crosslinking reaction
Fiberglass-reinforced plastics made
by successive layers of fibers and
polymer resin, which is
crosslinked
Polymer extruded in thin fibers
through a spinnerette and
solidified by cooling, drying, or
solvent exchange
Intensive mixing, similar to
kneading dough, used to mix
additives in polymers

Lawn furniture, garbage cans
Styrofoam coffee cups,
polyurethane seat cushions

Energy-absorbing front or
rear car bumpers

Hoses, tubing, vinyl house
siding, wire coatings

Plastic wrap

Soda bottles, detergent bottles

Irregular hollow objects, toys

Shower curtains, vinyl
upholstery, vinyl floor tile

Drinking cups, meat trays,
boat hulls, corrugated
sheeting
Bucket seat bottoms, battery
trays (in cars)
Photographic film
Electrical coatings,
reproduction of carved
objects
Automotive body panels,
bathtubs, golf clubs

Fibers for most kinds of
clothing; stretchy spandex,
acrylic yarns
Automotive tires; composites

MOLDING

TABLE 17.1

339

(Continued )

Processing Technique

Brief Description

Example Products

Lithography (photo-)
(Section 17.14)

A mask is used to shield light from a
pre-polymer solution; forms
highly-complex products with
small features
Adding polymer layer-by-layer
using computer-aided design to
form complex geometries

Electronic materials such as
integrated circuits

3-D printing (Section
17.15)

Architectural prototypes,
medical (tissue scaffolds,
teeth)

circulating hot air to dry the material) to an electrically heated barrel. The pellets are
conveyed forward through the barrel by a rotating screw. The material is melted as it goes
by a combination of heat from the barrel and the shearing (viscous energy dissipation) of
the screw.
Older machines had a reciprocating plunger in place of the screw. All the heat for
melting had to be supplied by conduction from the barrel, and mixing was very poor. This
resulted in low plasticizing (melting) rates, and a thermally nonuniform melt. The screw
generates heat within the material and provides some mixing, thereby increasing plasticizing rates and giving a more uniform melt temperature.
Molten material passes through a check valve at the front of the screw, and as it is
deposited ahead of the screw, it pushes the screw backward while material from the
previous shot is cooling in the mold. The cooled parts are ejected from the mold, the mold
closes, and the screw is pushed forward hydraulically, injecting a new shot of molten plastic
into the mold.
Some machines have a two-stage injection unit. A rotating-screw preplasticizer feeds
molten polymer into an injection cylinder, from which it is injected into the mold by a
hydraulically driven plunger. This configuration is claimed to provide better control of
shot size.
The molten polymer flows through a nozzle into the water-cooled mold, where it
travels in turn through a sprue, runners, and a narrow gate into the cavity (Figure 17.2).
When the part has cooled sufficiently, the mold opens and knockout pins eject the parts,
with material cooled in the sprues and runners attached. This material is removed by
hand or by robots (or left intact in the case of many toy model kits). With thermoplastics,
this material is chopped and recycled back to the hopper as regrind. Depending on the

FIGURE 17.1 Injection molding machine. From Modern Plastics Encyclopedia, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1969–1970 ed.

340

PROCESSING

FIGURE 17.2 Two-cavity injection mold. From Modern Plastics Encyclopedia, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1969–1970 ed.

extent of material degradation in the cycle and the property requirements of the finished
part, injection-molding operations may tolerate up to 25% regrind in the hopper feed.
Hot-runner molds contain heaters that maintain the material in the sprue and runners in
the molten state, and often a shutoff valve (“valve gate”) at the gate. This eliminates the
need for regrind.
The molds are opened and closed by hydraulic cylinders, toggle mechanisms, or
combinations of both. These have to be pretty hefty because pressures in the mold can
reach several thousand psi and the projected surface area of some parts may be hundreds of
square inches.
The molds themselves often involve much intricate hand labor and can be quite
mechanically complex. Surfaces are usually chrome-plated for wear resistance. Molds can
thus be quite expensive, but when amortized over a production run of many thousand parts,
the contribution of mold cost to the cost of the finished item may be insignificant.
Injection-molding presses are rated in terms of tons of mold-clamping capacity and in
ounces (of general-purpose polystyrene) of shot size. They range from 2-ton, 0.25-oz

MOLDING

341

laboratory units to 6600-ton, 2400-oz monsters that are used to mold garbage cans,
TV cabinets, dishwasher tubs, lawn furniture, etc. They are usually completely automated.
Cycle times (and therefore production rates) sometimes depend on plasticizing capacity
(the rate at which the material can be melted), but more often than not are limited by the
cooling time in the mold, which, in turn, is established by the thickness of the part and the
(usually very low) thermal diffusivity of the material. Typical cycle times are between 1/4
and 2 min. As usual, there are compromises involved. It is often tempting to try to reduce
cooling time by lowering the mold temperature, and thereby increasing the cooling rate,
and/or lowering the temperature at which the material is injected into the mold, reducing
the amount it must be cooled before solidifying enough to allow removal from the mold
without distortion. The higher material viscosity that results, however, can give rise to short
shots (incomplete mold filling), poor surface finish, and part distortion from frozen-in
strains (see below).
Injection-molding machines now are commonly equipped with feedback control
systems that monitor cavity pressure, screw position, and/or screw velocity and control
these variables through the hydraulic system to provide high-quality, uniform parts, using a
minimum amount of material and minimizing the number of rejects.
Example 17.1 Use the four-parameter model (Figure 15.1f), to explain the presence of
frozen-in strains in injection-molded parts.
Solution. When a polymer melt is squirted into a mold, it is subjected to a combination of
volumetric (from the high pressures), shear, and elongational (from flow-induced
orientation) strains. On a molecular level, these all arise because of deviations from
the most-random, highest entropy configuration, and therefore can be represented by
extension of the Voigt–Kelvin element, spring 2 and dashpot 2 of the four-parameter
model. When the mold fills and the gate freezes, these strains begin to relax (the Voigt–
Kelvin element begins to contract). However, before retraction is complete, the rapidly
dropping temperature in the mold raises h2 to the point where the rate of retraction
becomes very low, and the part is ejected from the mold with the strain frozen in.
Subsequent recovery outside the mold causes distortion of the part. The problems are
compounded by the fact that temperatures and flow fields are not uniform within the
mold, so the frozen-in strains vary from point to point in the part, giving rise to
nonuniform distortions (warping). (It is for this reason that the thermally uniform melt
from a screw machine is beneficial.) These problems can, of course, be minimized by
using higher melt temperatures and/or mold temperatures, but both lengthen the cycle
time. It might also be pointed out here that part failure can result if these frozen-in strains
are suddenly released, as, for example, by the concentration of stress by a scratch or sharp
corner on the part, or by plasticization by a liquid (stress cracking).

Foamed plastic articles are molded by incorporating a blowing agent (Chapter 7). These
blowing agents may be inert but volatile liquids, compounds that decompose chemically at
elevated temperatures to liberate a gas such as nitrogen or carbon dioxide, or simply
nitrogen dissolved in the polymer. In any case, the blowing gas is kept in solution by the
high pressures ahead of the screw. The mold is partially filled with a shot from the cylinder.
The reduced pressure within the mold allows the blowing agent to vaporize, expanding the
shot to fill the cavity and giving a foamed part.

342

PROCESSING

One drawback of traditional injection molding was its inability to produce parts with
complex internal passages. To be sure, simple holes could be incorporated by using core
pins that are retracted mechanically either parallel or perpendicular to the mold-opening
direction. To permit retraction, however, these pins (and the resulting holes) had to be
straight and if not of constant cross section, tapered appropriately with regard to the
direction of retraction.
The lost-core process allows the molding of parts with curved internal passages of
varying cross section. The core is cast in a low melting bismuth–tin alloy. This cast core is
placed in the injection mold and the plastic is molded around it. After the part is ejected
from the mold, the metal core is melted out. The high thermal diffusivity of the metal core
prevents its melting during the molding step. This process can be used for automotive
intake manifolds, where it provides the necessary curved passages with a nice, smooth
interior finish.
Injection molding was at one time confined exclusively to thermoplastics. It is now also
used for thermosets, which are injected into a heated mold, where they solidify through a
curing (crosslinking) reaction. This is a tricky operation. The compound must be heated
just enough in the barrel to achieve fluidity and injected into the mold before it begins to
cure appreciably, otherwise the entire machinery becomes a sticky mess. This requires
precise control of temperatures and cycle timing to prevent premature cure in the barrel and
the resulting shutdown-and-cleanout operation. Thermoset sprues and runners cannot be
recycled, of course, and must be minimized to cut waste.
Thermosetting compounds are traditionally compression molded. The molds are
mounted in hydraulic presses on steam-, electric-, or oil-heated platens. The molding
compound is fed to the heated mold, which closes, maintaining the material under pressure
until cured. The part is then ejected from the mold.
Molding compound in the form of granules or powder may be fed to the mold
automatically in weighed shots, or as pre-formed (by cold pressing) tablets. The charge
is often preheated to reduce heating time in the mold and thereby cycle time.
Mold temperature is a critical variable in compression molding. The higher it is, the
faster the material cures, but if it cures too fast, it will not have enough time to fill thin
sections and far corners of the mold, so a compromise must be reached. Material suppliers
attempt to optimize the cure characteristics to provide minimum cycle times.
Transfer molding is a variation of compression molding. Here, the material is melted in
a separate transfer pot, from which it is squirted into the mold. This can give faster cycle
times and since no solid material is pushed around in the mold cavity itself, damage to
delicate inserts (e.g., metal electrical contacts molded into a part) is minimized, mold wear
is reduced, and greater ease in filling intricate molds and more uniform cures are obtained.
However material cured in the transfer pot and sprue is wasted.
Reaction injection molding (RIM) [13] (Figure 17.3) is a process developed to mold
large polyurethane (Example 2.4Q) or polyurea (Example 2.4) materials directly from the
starting chemicals with cycle times comparable to injection molding. Between shots, the
highly reactive liquid polyol (for polyurethanes) or polyamine (for polyureas) and
isocyanate components are circulated from separate tanks through heat exchangers that
regulate their temperatures. During the shot, the streams are pumped at about 2500 psi
through nozzles in a mixing head, where they are impinged at high velocity and thoroughly
mixed by the resulting turbulence. The mixed stream begins to react as it flows into the
mold, where the polymerization reaction is completed. The mold is maintained at about
150  F, initially heating the reacting system but later removing the exothermic heat of

MOLDING

343

Isocyanate

Polyol

Gear pump

Heat
exchanger

Mixing head

To mold

FIGURE 17.3 RIM. The Kraus–Maffei mixing head is shown in the shot position. At the end of the
shot, the plunger moves down, packing the mold, cleaning the mixing chamber, and recirculating the
reactant streams back to their storage tanks.

polymerization as the temperature rises while the reaction approaches completion. Since
the unreacted system is relatively low in viscosity (about like pancake syrup), unlike the
molten polymer in an injection-molding process, it flows easily to fill large molds with
narrow clearances at relatively low pressures (100 psi, or so, in contrast to the thousands of
psi in injection molding). These low pressures allow the use of relatively inexpensive molds
and low-force mold clamping systems (compared to injection molding).
The polyurethanes and polyureas may be formulated to be flexible or rigid, solid or
foamed. Fillers and/or reinforcing agents (e.g., glass fibers or flake) may be added to one or
both components (in which case the process is sometimes known as RRIM-reinforced
RIM). A major application of RIM is to produce energy-absorbing front and rear ends and
body panels for automobiles. Cycle times of 2 min or less are feasible for such large parts.
RIM has achieved considerable success, particularly in the automotive industry, where
the drive to cut vehicle weight is intense. RIM panels have replaced stamped steel in a
variety of automotive applications. However, RIM faces stiff competition from other
plastics and processes, injection-molded thermoplastics, for example, for this large market.
A somewhat similar process known as resin-transfer molding (RTM) is used to
produce highly reinforced parts from low-viscosity, reactive starting materials. Reinforcing preforms, usually consisting of layers of fiberglass cloth or mat, are placed in the
mold. When the mold is closed, they pretty much extend throughout the cavity and
therefore the finished part. The resin and catalyst components are forced by positivedisplacement piston pumps through a static or motionless mixer (see Figure 17.12) into
the closed mold, where they cure. To ensure rapid and complete impregnation of the
reinforcing material, care must be taken to vent the mold properly to allow the escape of
air as the resin is injected. In some cases, the air is sucked out of the mold with a vacuum
pump prior to resin injection.

344

PROCESSING

RTM has been mainly used with unsaturated polyesters (Example 2.3), but it is also
applicable to epoxies, polyurethanes, etc. Parts weighing hundreds of pounds have been
produced (e.g., truck air deflectors). As with RIM, because the viscosity of the flowing
material is low, relatively modest pressures and inexpensive molds are required.
Some newer methods of forming complex three-dimensional shapes combine computeraided three-dimensional design with printing technology that build an object by adding
polymer pellets and growing a shape. This has been done to make replicas of fragile
artifacts, develop medical implants with precise geometries, and construct complex threedimensional scaffolds for seeding cells for tissue engineering. Alternatively, shapes can
also be carved from a polymer block (see Section 17.14 on lithography), similar to
sculpting, but the size of any interior cavities is dependent on the size of the tool used in
carving.
17.3

EXTRUSION [14–17]

Thermoplastic items with a uniform cross section are formed by extrusion. This includes
many familiar items such as pipe, hose and tubing, gaskets, wire and cable insulation,
sheeting, window-frame moldings, and vinyl siding for houses. Molding powder is
conveyed down an electrically or oil-heated barrel by a rotating screw. It melts as it
proceeds down the barrel and is forced through a die that gives it its final shape
(Figure 17.4). Vented extruders incorporate a section in which a vacuum is applied to
the melt to remove volatiles such as traces of unreacted monomer, moisture, solvent from
the polymerization process, or degradation products.
The design of extruder screws is an interesting and complex technical problem and has
received considerable study. Screws are optimized for the particular polymer being
extruded. Basically, a screw consists of three sections: melting, compression, and metering.
The function of the melting section is to convey the solid pellets forward from the hopper
and convert them into molten polymer. Its analysis involves a combination of fluid and
solid mechanics and heat transfer. The compression section, in which the depth of the
screw flight decreases, is designed to compact and mix the molten polymer to provide a
more-or-less homogeneous melt to the metering section, where the molten polymer is
pumped out through the die.

FIGURE 17.4 Vented extruder. From Modern Plastics Encyclopedia, McGraw-Hill, New York,
1969–1970 ed.

EXTRUSION

345

This last section is well understood. Analysis of the metering section is an interesting
application of the rheological principles discussed previously (Chapter 14), as is much of
die design. The determination of the die cross section needed to produce a desired product
cross section (other than circular) is still pretty much a trial-and-error process, however.
Viscoelastic polymer melts swell upon emerging from the die (i.e., die swell, which is
caused by the recovered stored elastic energy after squeezing through the die) and the
degree of die swell cannot be reliably predicted.
In addition to die swell, as the extrusion rate is increased, the extrudate begins to
exhibit roughness, and then an irregular, severely distorted profile. This phenomenon is
known as melt fracture. It is generally attributed to melt elasticity, but there is currently
no way of quantitatively predicting its onset or severity. It can be minimized by
increasing die length, smoothly tapering the entrance to the die, and raising the die
temperature.
Extruders are normally specified by screw diameter and length-to-diameter ratio.
Diameters range from 1 in (2.5 cm) in laboratory or small production machines to 1 ft
(30 cm) for machines used in the final pelletizing step of production operations. Typical
L/D ratios seem to grow each year or so, with values in the 20/1 to 36/1 range.
Single-screw extruders pump the polymer based on the drag flow of material
between the rotating screw and the stationary barrel. As a result, they are not
positive-displacement pumps and tend to give a rather broad residence time distribution.
Moreover, they are not particularly good mixing devices. Counter-rotating twin-screw
extruders are true positive-displacement pumps, capable of generating the high pressures needed in certain profile extrusion applications. Co-rotating twin-screw extruders,
though not positive displacement pumps, can give excellent mixing and a narrow
residence time distribution with proper screw design (subjecting all the material to
essentially the same shear and temperature history). They are, therefore, used extensively in polymer compounding (mixing) operations and, to a certain extent, as
continuous polymerization reactors.
In steady-state extruder operations, most or all of the energy needed to plasticize the
polymer is supplied by the drive motor through viscous energy dissipation. The heaters on
extruders are needed mainly for startup and because enough heat cannot always get from
where it is generated (the compression and metering zones) to where it is needed (the
melting zone). In fact, cooling through the barrel walls and/or screw center is sometimes
necessary. A steady-state energy balance on a typical operating extruder is shown
below [17]:
Extruder:
Material:
Operating Conditions:
Energy Inputs
Shaft work (viscous energy dissipation)
Heaters
Energy Outputs
Polymer enthalpy increase
Losses to ambient
Cooling water

3.5-in (8.9-cm) barrel 32/1 L/D
high-impact polystyrene
screw speed 121 rpm throughput
566 lb/h (257 kg/h)
þ90 %
þ10%
65%
15%
10%

346

PROCESSING

The complex interplay between the rate of viscous energy dissipation, temperature, and
material viscosity in an extruder sometimes results in a variation in output (surging) even at
constant screw speed. Where it is necessary to minimize surging, positive-displacement
gear pumps are often added after the extruder.
Most packaging film, such as Saran wrap, is produced by blow extrusion (Figure 17.5).
A thin-walled, hollow cylinder is extruded vertically upward. Air is introduced to the
interior of the cylinder, expanding it to a tube of film (less than 0.01 in thickness). The tube
is grasped between rolls at the top, preventing the escape of air and flattening it for
subsequent slitting and windup on rolls. The expanded tube is rapidly chilled by a blast of
air from a chill ring as it proceeds upward. With crystalline polymers such as polyethylene
and polypropylene, this rapid chilling produces smaller crystallites and enhances film
clarity.
“Cast” film is produced by extruding the polymer from a slot die onto polished metal
chill rolls. The rolls maintain a more uniform thickness (gage) and the more rapid cooling
and smoother surface finish provide superior film clarity. On the other hand, cast film is
oriented (stretched) only in the machine direction, whereas blown film is biaxially oriented,
and therefore has superior mechanical properties in equivalent thickness (or equivalent
properties in a thinner film).

Driven punch rolls

Wind up

Collapsing plate

Gusset bars

Guide rollers

Blown tube

Mandrel
Cooling ring
Air inlet
Adjustable
section of die

Extruder
Valve

Die

Air supply

FIGURE 17.5 Blow extrusion film line. From Modern Plastics Encyclopedia, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1969–1970 ed.

BLOW MOLDING

17.4

347

BLOW MOLDING [18]

A quick walk through a supermarket provides convincing proof of the economic importance of plastic bottles. They are nearly all made by blow molding. In one form of this
process, extrusion blow molding (Figure 17.6), a hollow cylindrical tube or parison is
extruded downward. The parison is then clamped between halves of a water-cooled mold.
The mold pinches off the bottom of the parison and forms the threads on the neck of the
bottle. Compressed air expands the parison against the inner mold surfaces, and when the
part has cooled sufficiently, the mold opens and the part is ejected. In one form of machine,
the mold “shuttles” aside for blowing and ejection as a new parison is being formed beneath
the die. High-production rotary machines may have two parison heads and index as many
as 20 molds past them on a rotating table.
The rheological properties of the parison are important. If it sags too much before being
grasped by the mold, the walls of the bottle will be too thin in places. Sag is minimized by
using high molecular weight compounds with high viscosities (high “melt strength”).
Many blow-molding extruders are equipped with parison programmers, which vary the
orifice diameter as the parison is being extruded, minimizing variations in wall thickness in
the blown product. The parisons may be “ovalized” to reduce variations in wall thickness in
objects of noncircular cross section.
Extrusion blow molding has passed well beyond the bottle-production stage. It is now
being used to produce large items such as drums (to replace the familiar 55-gallon steel
drum) and truck, automobile, and recreational-vehicle gasoline tanks. In such metalreplacement applications, blow-molded containers offer light weight and great design
flexibility.
In injection blow molding, the parison is formed by injection molding rather than
extrusion. A variation known as stretch (or orientation) blow molding is responsible for
the now ubiquitous plastic soda-pop bottle. In this process, parisons (often called
preforms in this case) are injection molded with the bottom end closed and the threads
and neck molded on the open top. They are allowed to cool to room temperature. Prior to
blowing, they are reheated in a radiant-heat oven in which close control is exercised over
the temperature profile of the parison. When introduced to the blow mold, the parison is
normally a fraction of the length of the mold (Figure 17.7), but before blowing, a rod

Hopper

Moving Mandrel programmer
Metering transition feed

Gear

Extruder screw

Blow air
Mold

Resin

Piston
Breaker plate

Extruder controller

Drive

Electrical heaters
Platen

Parison

Water cooled

FIGURE 17.6 Extrusion blow molding. From Modern Plastics Encyclopedia¸McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1969–1970 ed.

348

PROCESSING

FIGURE 17.7 Stretch blow molding: 1, parison injection molded; 2, parison is reheated; 3-A, a rod
stretches the parison, imparting axial orientation; 3-B, air expands parison against mold walls,
imparting tangential orientation; 4, finished bottle ejected from mold. From Modern Plastics 55(10),
22 (1978).

rapidly stretches the parison to nearly the full length of the mold, orienting the polymer
molecules in the axial direction. This is followed by blowing with compressed air, which
imparts tangential (hoop) orientation. The resulting biaxial orientation improves the
toughness, creep resistance, clarity, and barrier properties (resistance to permeation) of
the bottle material. In this case, the frozen-in strains that are normally detrimental to
thick, injection-molded parts (Example 17.1) are deliberately introduced to thin-walled
blown bottles with highly beneficial benefits. The biaxial orientation provided by stretch
blow molding is absolutely essential to the success of the poly(ethylene terephthalate)
soda-pop bottles.
17.5

ROTATIONAL, FLUIDIZED-BED, AND SLUSH MOLDING

Molding techniques have been developed to take advantage of the availability of finely
powdered plastics, mainly polyethylene and nylons. In rotational molding, a charge of
powder is introduced to a heated mold, which is then rotated about two mutually
perpendicular axes. This distributes the powder over the inner mold surfaces, where it
fuses. The mold is then cooled by compressed air or water sprays, opened, and the part is
ejected.
Rotational molding is capable of producing extremely irregular hollow objects. The
molds are inexpensive, often simply sheet metal, because no elevated pressures are
involved, and can be heated in simple hot-air ovens. Thus, capital outlay is relatively
low. The process is in many ways competitive with extrusion blow molding for the
production of large, hollow items such as drums and gasoline tanks. Blow molding requires
a much larger initial investment, but is capable of higher production rates.
These two processes (blow and rotational molding) also provide a good example of how
the processing operation, polymer, and finished properties are often intimately connected.
Blow molding can handle very high molecular weight linear polyethylenes, and in fact
usually requires high molecular weight material to prevent excessive parison sag.
Rotational molding, on the other hand, requires a low molecular weight resin because
a low viscosity is needed to permit fusion of the powder under the influence of the low
forces in a rotational mold.
When subjected to stresses for long periods of time, particularly in the presence of
certain liquids, linear polyethylene has a tendency to fail through stress cracking. It turns
out that high molecular weight resins are much more resistant to stress cracking. Thus,
although the parts might appear similar, those produced by extrusion blow molding will

CALENDERING

349

ordinarily have superior resistance to stress cracking. The difference can be narrowed or
eliminated by using more material (thereby lowering stress for a given load) or by using a
crosslinkable polyethylene in rotational molding. Either of these solutions increases
material cost, however.
Polymer powders are also used in a process known as fluidized-bed coating. When a gas
is passed up through a bed of particles, the bed expands and behaves much like a boiling
liquid. When a heated object is dipped into a bed of fluidized polymer particles, those that
contact it fuse and coat its surface. Such 100% solids coating processes are increasing in
importance because they eliminate the pollution often caused by solvent evaporation when
ordinary paints are used.
Similar procedures have been in use for years with plastisols (Chapter 7). Liquid platisol
is poured into a heated female mold. The plastisol in contact with the mold surface fuses
and the remainder is poured out for reuse. This slush-molding process is used to produce
objects such as doll’s heads. Dipping a heated object into a liquid plastisol coats it with
plasticized polymer. Vinyl-coated wire dishracks are familiar products of this process.
17.6

CALENDERING

Polymer sheets (greater than 0.01 in thickness) may be produced either by extrusion
through thin, flat dies or by calendering (Figure 17.8). Basically, a calender consists of a
series of rotating, heated rolls, between which the polymer compound (most often
plasticized PVC) is squeezed into sheet form. The thickness of the sheet is determined
by the clearance between the rolls. Commercial calenders may be very large (rolls up to 3 ft

FIGURE 17.8 Inverted “L” calender, illustrating process variables for the production of PVC
sheet. From Modern Plastics Encyclopedia, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1969–1970 ed.

350

PROCESSING

(1 m) in diameter by 8 ft (3 m) long) and may represent a big capital outlay, but are capable
of tremendous production rates (up to 100 yards/min). The polymer may be laminated to a
layer of fabric between two rolls to give a supported sheeting. The final rolls may also be
embossed to impart a pattern to the sheet. Shower curtains, vinyl upholstery materials
(Naugahyde), and vinyl floor tile are produced by calendering.
17.7

SHEET FORMING (THERMOFORMING) [19, 20]

Thermoplastic sheet is converted to a wide variety of finished articles by processes
generically known as sheet forming or thermoforming. Although the details vary considerably, these processes all involve heating the sheet above its softening point and forcing it
to conform to a cooled mold (Figure 17.9).
In vacuum forming, for example, the heat-plasticized sheet (either directly from an
extruder or preheated in an oven) is drawn against the mold surface by the application of a
vacuum from beneath the surface. Similarly, a positive pressure may be used to force the
sheet against the mold surface, and where very deep draws are required, mechanical assists,
plug forming, are used. In drape forming, the plasticized sheet is draped over a male mold,
perhaps with a vacuum assist.
From a material standpoint, polymers used for sheet forming should have high “melt
strengths,” that is, high melt viscosities so that they do not draw down or thin out
excessively or perhaps even tear in the forming operation. Thus, high molecular weight
resins are preferred. One of the great advantages of sheet forming is that relatively
inexpensive molds are required since no high pressures are involved. Epoxy molds are
often used because they can be easily cast to shape from a handmade pattern.
Among the many familiar items made by sheet forming are drinking cups, meat trays,
wraps for cigarette packs, aircraft canopies, corrugated plastic sheets for roofing, lighting
globes, and even items as large as the hull of a boat.

Sheet

Clamp

Mold
Vacuum holes
(a)

Sheet
Clamp

(b)

FIGURE 17.9

Sheet-forming process: (a) vacuum forming; (b) drape forming.

CASTING

351

A similar technique is used to make sheet molding compound, but requires the addition
of several additives, so the discussion is included in Chapter 18.
17.8

STAMPING

The plastics industry has long envied the ability to stamp sheet-metal parts with cycle times
of a few seconds. Because of the high production rates possible with a stamping process
(particularly for forming auto bodies from stamped steel) and the large existing investment
in stamping presses, the stamping process has been adapted to form thin-walled (0.1-in)
parts from glass-reinforced thermoplastic sheet (Azdel ). The sheet is heated in an infrared
oven and then stamped in modified metal-forming equipment, with a dwell time of about 8
s as the material cools in the mold. Because of the thin sections, cooling is rapid and cycle
times as low as 15–20 s can be achieved with automated feeding and part-removal
systems [21,22]. So far, the process has been limited to rather simple shapes and shallow
draws (crankcase oil pans, battery trays, bucket seat bottoms and backs, etc.), but because
of its economic potential, stamping has been combined with other polymer processes (such
as thermoforming) in the development of relatively inexpensive high-throughput
processes.
17.9

SOLUTION CASTING

Solvent-evaporation casting (commonly known as solution casting) produces plastic sheets
or films by dissolving the polymer in an appropriate solvent, spreading the viscous solution
onto a polished surface, and evaporating the solvent. Additives such as plasticizers and
pigments can be easily added to the solution, with a good dispersion achieved in the dried
material. In the manufacture of photographic film base, the solution is spread with a “knife”
onto a slowly rotating wheel about 2 ft wide and 20 ft in diameter. As the wheel revolves,
heated air evaporates the solvent, which is recovered for reuse, and the dried film is stripped
from the wheel before the casting point is reached again.
17.10

CASTING

The raw materials for many thermosetting polymers are available as low molecular
weight liquids that are converted to solid or rubbery materials by a crosslinking reaction.
Similarly, liquid vinyl monomers can be converted to solid, linear polymers through an
addition reaction. These materials are easily cast to shape at atmospheric pressure in
inexpensive molds. A good example of this process is the reproduction of carved wood
furniture panels. Only the original is actually carved, which is on expensive step. A mold
is made by pouring a room-temperature-curing silicone rubber over the original. When
cured, the rubber mold is stripped from the original and used to cast multiple copies from
a liquid, unsaturated polyester (Example 2.3). A free-radical initiator causes crosslinking
to the final solid object, which faithfully reproduces the detail of the carved original at a
fraction of the cost.
Such furniture components provide a good example of how the processing method of
choice often depends on the production volume. They can also be injection molded from,

352

PROCESSING

for example, high-impact polystyrene. Because the panels are usually large, they require
a large and very expensive molding machine. Similarly, the mold, with its intricate
carving and wood-grain detail in hardened steel, is very expensive to produce. Thus, the
capital outlay for injection-molded panels is huge, while the reverse is true for cast
panels. Nevertheless, parts can be injection molded with cycle times under a minute and
very little hand labor involved, and when the capital investment is amortized over a large
number of panels, it becomes a small contribution to the total panel cost. On the other
hand, the long cure times and hand labor required for the casting process make it
prohibitively expensive for large production runs, but it is the preferred process for small
numbers of parts.
Delicate electrical components are often encapsulated or “potted” by casting a
thermosetting liquid resin (usually an epoxy) around them. The casting of acrylic sheet
from monomer or syrup is described in Chapter 12.
Example 17.2 A polymer of divinyl benzene H2C¼CH-f-HC¼CH2 is to be used to make
rotameter bobs (1-in-long  1/2-in-diameter cylinders). What processing technique should
be used?
Solution. The monomer is tetrafunctional (Chapter 2) and hence will be highly crosslinked
in the polymerization reaction; therefore, it cannot be softened by heat or; melted. The only
suitable technique is casting directly from the monomer, either to final shape or casting rods
that can then be cut and machined to the final shape.
17.11

REINFORCED THERMOSET MOLDING

Many plastics, when used by themselves, do not possess enough mechanical strength for
structural applications. When reinforced with high-strength fibers, however, the composites have high strength-to-weight ratios and can be fabricated into a wide variety of
complex shapes. Glass and other fibers are used extensively to reinforce thermosetting
plastics, mostly polyesters and epoxies. Fiberglass-reinforced plastics (FRPs) are now used
for just about all boats under 40 ft in length, truck cabs, automobile body panels, structural
panels, aircraft components, and bathtubs.
Many such objects are fabricated by a process known as hand layup. The mold surface is
often first sprayed with a pigmented but nonreinforced gel coat of the liquid resin to
provide a smooth surface finish. The gel coat is followed up by successive layers of
fiberglass, either in the form of woven cloth or random matting, impregnated with the liquid
resin, which is then cured (crosslinked) to give the finished product.
This process is tremendously versatile. The molds are relatively inexpensive, because
no high pressure is required. Objects may be selectively reinforced by adding extra layers
of material where desired. The major drawback of the process is the expense of hand
labor involved, which makes it uneconomical for large production volumes. For this
reason, a sprayup process is often used. A special gun chops continuous fibers into
approximately 1 in lengths. The chopped fibers are combined with a stream of liquid
resin and sprayed directly onto the mold surfaces. Although the random chopped fibers
do not reinforce quite as well as woven cloth or random mat, the labor savings are
substantial. Sprayed-on polyester-fiberglass backings are also applied to vacuum-formed

FIBER SPINNING

353

poly(methyl methacrylate) sheets, thus combining a smooth, hard, strain- and UV-resistant
acrylic surface skin with the lightweight strength of a FRP core. Such composites are used for
sinks, bathtubs, and recreational vehicle bodies.
In many objects, stresses are not uniformly distributed, so the reinforcing fibers may be
arranged to support the stress most efficiently. In “fiberglass” or “graphite” fishing rods,
vaulting poles, golf club shafts, etc., the fibers are arranged along the long axis to resist the
bending stresses applied. The process of filament winding extends this principle to more
complex structures. Continuous filaments of the reinforcing fiber are impregnated with
liquid resin and then wound on a rotating mandrel. The winding pattern is designed to resist
most efficiently the anticipated stress distribution. The range of the Polaris submarine
ballistic missile was increased by several hundred miles by replacing the metallic rocket
casing with a filament-wound reinforced plastic system. This technique is also used to
produce tanks and pipe for the chemical process industries, and even gun barrels, by
filament winding about a thin metal core that provides the necessary heat and abrasion
resistance.
More recently, nanofibers (particularly carbon nanotubes) have found their way into
fibrous polymer composites, offering even greater strength per mass when compared to
composites made using the larger fibers above.
Pultrusion [23] is used to produce continuous lengths of objects with a constant cross
section, for example, structural beams. Continuous fibers (such as roving that is made into
yarn) and/or mat are impregnated by passing them through a tank of liquid resin and pulling
slowly through a heated die of the desired cross section. The resin cures to a solid as it
passes through the die.
17.12

FIBER SPINNING

The polymers used for synthetic fibers are similar, and in many cases, identical to those
used as plastics, but for fibers, the processing operation must produce an essentially infinite
length-to-diameter ratio. In all cases, this is accomplished by forcing the plasticized
polymer through a spinnerette, a plate in which a multiplicity of holes has been formed to
produce the individual fibers, which are then twisted together to form a thread for
subsequent weaving operations. The cross section of the spinnerette holes obviously has
a lot to do with the fiber cross sections, which, in turn, greatly influences the properties of
the fiber. The three basic types of spinning operations differ mainly in the method of
plasticizing and deplasticizing the polymer.
Melt spinning is basically an extrusion process. The polymer is plasticized by
melting and pumped through the spinnerette. The fibers are usually solidified by a
cross-current blast of air as they proceed to the drawing rolls. The drawing step
stretches the fibers, orienting the molecules in the direction of stretch and inducing the
high degrees of crystallinity necessary for good fiber properties. Nylons are commonly
melt spun.
In dry spinning, a solution of the polymer is forced through the spinnerette. As the
fibers proceed downward to the drawing rolls, a countercurrent stream of warm air
evaporates the solvent (Figure 17.10). In this process, the cross section of the fiber is
determined not only by the shape of the spinnerette holes but also by the complex nature
of the diffusion-controlled solvent evaporation process, because there is considerable

354

PROCESSING

FIGURE 17.10
Sons, Inc.

Dry spinning of polymer fibers [24]. Reprinted with permission of John Wiley and

shrinkage as the solvent evaporates. The acrylic fibers (Orlon , Creslan , Acrilan ,
etc.), mainly polyacrylonitrile, are produced by dry spinning.
Wet spinning is similar to dry spinning in that a polymer solution is forced through the
spinnerette. Here, however, the solution strands pass directly into a liquid bath. The liquid
might be a nonsolvent for the polymer, precipitating it from solution as the solvent diffuses
outward into the nonsolvent. The bath might also contain a substance that precipitates a

COMPOUNDING

355

polymer fiber by chemically reacting with the dissolved material. Here again, the process as
well as the spinnerette influences the fiber cross section. Kevlar is an example of a wet-spun
fiber (Section 4.8). The polymer is dissolved in concentrated sulfuric acid and the solution
is spun into a water bath. The water leaches out the acid, causing the polymer to precipitate
in fiber form.

Example 17.3 Suggest processing techniques for the manufacture of the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

100,000 ft of plasticized PVC garden hose
50,000 polystyrene pocket combs
100,000 polyethylene detergent bottles
5000 phenolic (phenol-formaldehyde) TV knobs
six souvenir paperweights of poly(methyl methacrylate) containing a coin
a strip of chlorinated rubber (a linear, amorphous polymer) and white pigment
(60:40), roughly 0.001 in thick, 4 in wide, running 20 miles down the center of a
highway
(g) 1,000,000 hard (not foamed) polystyrene meat trays, 0.005 in thick
Solution.
(a) Extrusion
(b) Injection molding
(c) Blow molding
(d) Compression, transfer, or thermoset injection molding
(e) Although these objects could be injection molded, the small number of articles
required would make injection molding uneconomical. They can easily be cast
from the monomer.
(f) Dissolve rubber in solvent, add pigment, and spray on highway. Evaporation of
solvent leaves the desired strip.
(g) Extrude sheet, then vacuum form trays.

17.13

COMPOUNDING

Polymers are almost always used in combination with other ingredients. These ingredients
are discussed in subsequent chapters, but they must be combined with the polymer in a
compounding operation.
Occasionally, if they do not interfere with the polymerization reaction, such ingredients
may be incorporated at the monomer or low molecular weight polymer (e.g., unsaturated
polyester, Example 2.3) stage and carried through the polymerization and/or crosslinking
reaction. In such cases, viscosities are low enough to permit the use of standard mixing
equipment. Similarly, powdered PVC and thermosets are compounded with other ingredients in the usual tumbling-type of blending equipment.

356

PROCESSING

FIGURE 17.11
(1968).

Banbury mixer. From L.K. Arnold, Introduction to Plastics, Iowa State UP, Ames

Because of their extremely high melt viscosities, specialized equipment, however, is
usually needed to compound ingredients with high molecular weight thermoplastics.
In general, high shear rates and large power inputs per unit volume of material are required
to achieve a uniform and intimate dispersion of ingredients in the melt. Single- and twinmelt extruders (Section 17.3) are used extensively for continuous compounding. The latter,
with screws often modified to incorporate special mixing sections, are better mixers and
provide a narrower, more uniform distribution of residence times, while the formed offer
lower cost and greater mechanical simplicity. Intensive mixers, such as the Banbury mixer
(Figure 17.11), subject the material to high shear rates and large power inputs in a closed,
heated chamber containing rotating, intermeshing blades.
A two-roll mill (Figure 17.12) generates high shear rates in a narrow nip between two
heated rolls that counter-rotate with slightly different velocities. In commercial mills, the
rolls are about 1 ft in diameter and 3 ft long. Once the polymer has banded on one of the

FIGURE 17.12

Two-roll mill.

COMPOUNDING

357

FIGURE 17.13 The Kenics Static Mixer. From McCabe W.L., J.C. Smith, and P. Harriott, Unit
Operations of Chemical Engineering, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1985.

rolls, ingredients are added to the bank between the rolls. The band is cut off the roll with a
knife, rolled up, and fed back to the nip at right angles to its former direction. This is done
several times to improve mixing. Despite extensive safety precautions, operators of
two-roll mills often have n fingers (n < 10). To the author’s knowledge, no systematic
studies of the effect of the additional (10n) ingredients on the properties of the
compounded polymers have been reported.
Motionless or static mixers are a more recent development for continuous compounding [25–27]. One example of this type of device, the Kenics mixer (Figure 17.13), consists
of a series of alternating right- and left-handed helices that continuously divide the melt and
cause it to rotate around its own hydraulic axis. Each element in a Kenics mixer breaks the
stream into two parts. Therefore, an n-element mixer generates 2n layers, so n does not have
to be very large to achieve intimate mixing. The obvious advantage of this type of device is
that it contains no moving parts (although the material must be pumped through it). It also
requires relatively low power input per unit of material processed. Such mixers provide
good radial mixing and relatively narrow residence-time distributions, despite the fact that
the flow is invariably laminar in the processing of polymer melts. They are also
incorporated in extruders, between the screw and die, and in injection-molding machines
ahead of the nozzle to improve the thermal homogeneity of the melt.

358

PROCESSING

17.14

LITHOGRAPHY

Lithography, literally stone writing, has been used to etch patterns into solid materials
(primarily harder materials than polymers), and has been used extensively in microelectronics to etch fine and complex patterns into silicon wafers to make integrated
circuits. A photoresist, usually made of a polymer, is made to block an intense light,
resulting in the reverse pattern being etched into the wafer. For polymer processing,
similar photoresists (or masks) are placed between a light source and a monomer or preolymer solution containing a photoinitiator. After polymerization, unreacted solution
behind the mask can be removed, resulting in polymer films with features that approach
submicron sizes that match the holes in the mask. The mask is recycled, similar to the
molds used in injection molding. Photolithography is best suited for small parts (films)
that require complex two-dimensional features, but can be used for high-volume
production.
Electron beam lithography is a similar process, but instead of using light, a beam of
electrons is shot at a surface to create the surface architecture with the advantage of being
able to produce even smaller features (into the nanometer region, as electron beams can be
focused to dimensions smaller than the wavelength of light).
17.15

THREE-DIMENSIONAL (RAPID) PROTOTYPING

A more recent addition to the methods of polymer processing is inkjet printing or threedimensional prototyping. Here, polymer droplets can be placed using a machine similar to
an inkjet printer to build complex three-dimensional architectures, usually with the
assistance of computer-aided design (Figure 17.14). This is a rather expensive technique
in that (even with rapid prototyping) the time required to make each part can be fairly
lengthy. However, there is one really great advantage: the interior architecture of a
polymeric part can be designed with a great deal of geometric specificity, much more
complex than can be achieved by blow molding or extrusion. This allows void spaces to be
built into materials, such as conduits for flow, but in three dimensions. One area of
application is in light-emitting diode (LED) displays used in televisions and computer
screens. They are also useful in three-dimensional reconstructions.

FIGURE 17.14 Rapid prototyping method using an inkjet printer head to construct threedimensional objects. After leaving the head, the droplets coalesce, and by rastering over a region
multiple times, a three-dimensional object can be made.

PROBLEMS

17.16

359

SUMMARY

Because polymer properties can be easily modified by addition of solvents, plasticizers, or
heat, they are quite versatile when selecting a production method. This gives rise to a wide
range of processing techniques (summarized in Table 17.1), but also presents challenges.
Not every technique will work for each type of polymer, e.g., thermosets and polymers that
degrade easily cannot be melt processed. On the other hand, starting with a liquid
(monomer, prepolymer, polymer solution, or polymer melt) allows polymers to be
somewhat easily formed into rather complex (sometimes large) shapes with a great degree
of reproducibility. Although the major techniques used in polymer processing have been
presented in this chapter, numerous variations and combinations continue to evolve to
allow processing of new polymers and develop economical methods to create even more
complex products. Chapters 18 to 22 include some additional processing techniques, but is
focused on additives (as in sheet molding compound) or on more specifically applied areas
(such as surface finishing and microencapsulation).
PROBLEMS
1

Using the Internet, identify the commercial suppliers of any three pieces of equipment
used to process polymers. List the supplier, approximate capacity of the equipment
(lbs/day or kg/day), materials the equipment is made of, and an example of a product
made by each piece of equipment.

2

What processing methods are used to make the following polymeric products:
(a) computer keyboards
(c) contact lenses
(e) acrylic fibers for clothing
(g) a bottle for liquid detergent

(b) rubber tires
(d) mylar balloons
(f) car windshields

3

Explain the difference between thermoforming and compression molding.

4

What is the function of a spinnerette in wet and dry spinning? Define denier.

5

You are using an extruder to make rubber tubing, but one of the heating elements near
the nozzle does not work. What kind(s) of problems might this cause in the process?
What problems might arise in the quality control of the product?

6

Explain why injection molding techniques can only process thermoplastics, but can
also be used to make thermosets.

7

In making 50,000 plastic shower liners (approximately 6 ft by 8 ft sheets with thickness
of 1/16 in) out of poly(vinyl chloride), what process would you recommend using?
What temperature should be used for the process (approximately)? What would happen
if the temperature was too high and too low? What additive(s) would you use, and why?

8

You discover that the plastic PET bottles made using blow molding in your plant have a
large rate of rejection due to problems with holes in the threaded top part of the bottles
(and that the threaded part is often very thin).
(a) Give a likely explanation of what is causing this problem.
(b) Suggest two changes in processing that will help resolve the problem.

360

PROCESSING

REFERENCES
[1] Kroschwitz, J. (ed. ), Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Engineering, 2nd. ed., Wiley, New
York, 1985.
[2] Modern Plastics Encyclopedia, McGraw-Hill, New York (yearly).
[3] Rosato, D.V. and D.V. Rosato, Plastics Processing Data Handbook, Van Nostrand Reinhold,
New York, 1989.
[4] Morton-Jones, D.H., Polymer Processing, Chapman and Hall, London, 1989.
[5] Han, C.D., Rheology in Polymer Processing, Academic, New York, 1976.
[6] McKelvey, J.M., Polymer Processing, Wiley, New York, 1962.
[7] Middleman, S., Fundamentals of Polymer Processing, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1977.
[8] Pearson, J.R.A., Mechanics of Polymer Processing, Elsevier, New York, 1985.
[9] Pearson, J.R.A. and S.M. Richardson (eds), Computational Analysis of Polymer Processing,
Applied Science, New York, 1983.
[10] Tadmor, Z. and C.G. Gogos, Principles of Polymer Processing, Wiley-Interscience, New York,
1979.
[11] Rosato, D.V. and D.V. Rosato, Injection Molding Handbook, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New
York, 1985.
[12] Rubin, I.I., Injection Molding: Theory and Practice, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1973.
[13] Macosko, C.W., Fundamentals of Reaction Injection Molding, Hanser, Munich, 1988.
[14] Stevens, M.J., Extruder Principles and Operation, Elsevier, New York, 1985.
[15] Tadmor, Z. and I. Klein, Engineering Principles of Plasticating Extrusion, Van Nostrand
Reinhold, New York, 1970.
[16] Rauwendaal, C., Polymer Extrusion, Hanser, Munich, 1986.
[17] Private communication to S.L. Rosen, NRM Corporation.
[18] Rosato, D.V. and D.V. Rosato (eds), Blow Molding Handbook, Hanser, Munich, 1989.
[19] Gruenwald, G., Thermoforming: A Plastics Processing Guide, Technomic, Lancaster, PA, 1987.
[20] Throne, J.L., Thermoforming, Hanser, Munich, 1987.
[21] Sikes, S., Mod. Plast. 51(1), 70 (1974).
[22] Ward, L.G., Plast. Eng. 35(4), 47 (1979).
[23] Meyer, R.W., Handbook of Pultrusion Technology, Chapman and Hall, London, 1985.
[24] Boliek, J.E. and A.W. Jensen, Fibers, Elastomeric, in Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical
Technology, Wiley, 2009, p. 15.
[25] Skoblar, S.M., Plast. Technol. October 1974, p. 37.
[26] Schott, N.R., B. Weinstein, and D. LaBombard, Chem. Eng. Prog. 71(1), 54 (1975).
[27] Chen, S.J., Chem. Eng. Prog. 71(8), 80 (1975).

CHAPTER 18

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: PLASTICS
AND PLASTIC ADDITIVES

18.1

INTRODUCTION

As mentioned in the introduction to this book, there are five major applications for polymers:
plastics, rubbers, synthetic fibers, surface finishes, and adhesives. Previous sections have
dealt with the properties of polymers themselves. Although these properties are undoubtedly
most important in determining the ultimate applications, polymers are rarely used in a
chemically pure form; so in a discussion of the technology of polymers, it is necessary to
mention the properties of polymers used for these industrially important applications. There
are also numerous modifiers and additives commonly used, which are introduced in
Section 18.4, but are useful in many products that fit any of the five applications discussed
in the next five chapters. This chapter will focus on simple plastics.
18.2

PLASTICS

Plastics are normally thought of as being polymer compounds possessing a degree of
structural rigidity–– in terms of the usual stress–strain test, a modulus on the order of 108 Pa
(N/m2) (15, 000 psi) or greater. The molecular requirements for a polymer to be used in a
plastic compound are as follows: (1) if linear or branched, the polymer must be below its
glass transition temperature (if amorphous) and/or below its crystalline melting point
(if crystallizable) at use temperature; otherwise (2) it must be crosslinked sufficiently to
restrict molecular response essentially to straining of bond angles and lengths (e.g., ebonite
or “hard” rubber).

Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

361

362

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: PLASTICS AND PLASTIC ADDITIVES

10,000
a

b

Stress (psi)

8000
6000
4000
c
2000
0

To 400–600%

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Elongation (%)

FIGURE 18.1 Typical stress–strain curves for plastics: (a) rigid and brittle; (b) rigid and tough;
(c) flexible and tough.

18.3

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF PLASTICS

The engineering properties of commercial plastics vary considerably within the broad
definition given above. Figure 18.1 sketches some representative stress–strain curves for
three types of plastics. As discussed previously, for any given material, the quantitative
nature of the curves depends markedly on the rate of strain and the temperature. In general,
faster straining and lower temperatures give higher moduli (slopes) and smaller ultimate
elongations.
Plastics with stress–strain curves of the type in Figure 18.1a are rigid and brittle. The
former term refers to the high initial modulus. The latter refers to the area under the stress–
strain curve, which represents the energy per unit volume required to cause failure.
These materials usually fail by catastrophic crack propagation at strains in the order of 2%.
Since hardness correlates well with tensile modulus, which is another valuable property of
this type of plastic. Examples of this class are polystyrene, poly(methyl methacrylate), and
most thermosets.
Curve b represents rigid and tough materials, sometimes known as engineering plastics.
In addition to high modulus, tensile strength and hardness, these materials undergo ductile
deformation or drawing beyond the yield point, evidence of considerable molecular
orientation before failure. The latter confers toughness or impact resistance, that is, the
ability to withstand shock loading without brittle failure. Examples of this class of
materials are polycarbonates, cellulose esters, and nylons. Although the reasons are not
entirely clear, such plastics generally exhibit a secondary dynamic damping peak (Chapter 15)
well below their use temperature.
Curve c represents flexible and tough plastics, as typified by low- and medium-density
polyethylenes. Here, the ductile deformation leading to very high ultimate elongations
results from the conversion of low-crystallinity material to high-crystallinity material.
The tensile samples “neck down” with the density, percent crystallinity, and modulus of the
material in the neck being appreciably greater than those of the parent material. Despite
their good toughness, these materials are limited in their structural applications by their low
moduli and tensile strengths.

CONTENTS OF PLASTIC COMPOUNDS

TABLE 18.1

Common Additive Types for Plastics

Additive Type
Reinforcing agents
Fillers
Coupling agents
Stabilizers
Pigments
Dyes
Plasticizers
Lubricants
Processing aids
Curing agents
Blowing agents
Flame retardants

18.4

363

Example(s)
Graphite fibers
Wood flour, calcium carbonate
Bifunctional silanes
Quinones and other free-radical scavengers
Titanium dioxide, carbon black
Various colored dyes
Phthalates, medium MW organics
Stearic acid, low MW organics
Low MW polymers (to reduce viscosity)
Sulfur, crosslinking agents (often with a promoter)
Pentane and volatile organics, CCl3F (makes foam)
Phosphorus, organics with Br or Cl groups

CONTENTS OF PLASTIC COMPOUNDS

In addition to the polymer itself, which is seldom used alone, plastics usually contain at
least small amounts of one or more of the following additives (summarized in
Table 18.1) [1,2].
18.4.1

Reinforcing Agents [3]

The function of these is to enhance the structural properties of the compound, in particular,
properties such as modulus (stiffness), strength, and the retention of these properties at
higher temperatures. The use of long fibers to reinforce epoxy and polyester thermosets was
mentioned in the previous chapter. While glass is by far the most common reinforcing fiber,
largely due to its strength, ready availability, and relatively low cost, other, more exotic
fibers are used where very high strength-to-weight ratios are required and cost is of
secondary concern. Carbon or “graphite” fibers, made by pyrolysis of pitch or polyacrylonitrile fibers, offer superior performance at a cost premium over glass. They are used in
many aerospace applications and in more down-to-earth objects such as golf-club shafts,
tennis-racket frames, racing-car bodies, and automotive springs and driveshafts. Aramid
(aromatic polyamid) fibers (Kevlar) are also used to reinforce plastics for premiumproperty applications, sometimes in combination with other fibers. And, more recently,
nanofibers (including carbon nanotubes) and nanoclays have been employed as additives to
strengthen plastics with even smaller amounts of additive (see Figure 18.2).
Short (1/8 to 1/2 in.) (3–13-mm) glass and other fibers are used extensively to reinforce
thermoplastics [5]. Addition of up to 40 wt% short glass fibers to nylon, polypropylene,
poly(butylene terephthalate), and others, provides a relatively inexpensive way of greatly
improving the structural strength of the plastic, as illustrated in Table 18.2. The glassreinforced materials also have less mold shrinkage and, therefore, give parts with better
dimensional control and stability. The down side is that they are more difficult to process
and often have a rough surface finish.
Note that major gains in heat-distortion temperature are obtained when using reinforcing agents with the crystalline polymers nylon 6/6, poly(butylene terephthalate), and
polypropylene, but not with the amorphous polystyrene and polycarbonate. This is a

364

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: PLASTICS AND PLASTIC ADDITIVES

140
15 wt%

120

Stress / MPa

10 wt%
100

5 wt%

80

Pure PEEK

60
40
20
0
0

5

10

15
Strain/%

20

25

FIGURE 18.2 Stress–strain curves showing the effect of adding carbon nanofibers to poly(ether
ether ketone), PEEK, a semicrystalline thermoplastic. Reprinted from [4] with permission from
Elsevier.

general result. The crystallites “lock on to the fibers, maintaining mechanical integrity well
above Tg.
Another example of reinforcement is the use of up to 20% dispersed rubber particles, on
the order of 1 mm in diameter, to increase the toughness or impact strength of a normally
brittle plastic. Figure 18.3 illustrates the effect of adding increasing levels of a micron-sized
rubber to polystyrene in a high rate-of-strain tensile test (to simulate shock loading). The
addition of the rubber particles decreases the modulus (slope) and ultimate tensile strength
but introduces considerable ductile deformation (elongation beyond the “knee”), thereby
increasing the area under the stress–strain curve. It also imparts a secondary dynamic
damping peak below use temperature. In effect, it converts a type a material (Figure 18.1)
to a type b material. For many applications, the improvement in impact strength
considerably outweighs the slight decreases in modulus and tensile strength produced
by the addition of rubber. Impact modifiers are rubbery additives that impart such
toughness when blended with plastics. Proper compatibility (good adhesion but not
solubility) between the phases is essential in these applications. This is often achieved
with graft and block copolymers (compatibilizers), which have blocks of repeat units at
each end that are compatible with each polymer phase.
Commercially important examples of rubber-toughened plastics include the highimpact polystyrenes (HIPS), in which polystyrene is toughened with a polybutadiene
rubber, and the acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) plastics, in which a polybutadiene or
poly(butadiene-co-acrylonitrile) rubber toughens a poly(styrene-co-acrylonitrile) glassy
phase. More complete discussions of these two-phase polymer systems are available
elsewhere [7,8].
18.4.2

Fillers [9]

Fillers are particulate materials whose major function often is simply to extend the polymer
and thereby reduce the cost of the plastic compound. Fillers can take up a substantial

TABLE 18.2

Some Propertiesa of Short Glass Fiber-Reinforced Thermoplastic [6]

Plasticb
wt% glass
Ultimate tensile strenght, psi ASTM
D638
Ultimate elongation, %
Tensile modulus, 103 psi ASTM D638
Izod impact, 1/8-in ft-lb/in ASTM
D256A
Rockwell hardness ASTM D758
Linear coefficient of expansion, 10-6/C
ASTM D696
264 psi DTUL,dF ASTM D648
Density, g/cm3 ASTM D792
a

Nylon 6/6c

PP

PBT

PS

0
5300

40
11,700

0
12,400

30
25,000

0
9500

30
19,500

0
8200

30
16,500

0
6400

30
12,000

350
195
0.8

2.8
1300
1.7

300
390
1.3

4
1300
3.0

110
345
16

3.5
1300
2.3

175
360
0.85

3
1380
1.3

1.9
400
0.4

1.1
1250
2.0

R91
90

R106
30

R120
80

R110
35

M70
68

M92
22

M73
67

M90
25

M67
77

M90
20

130
0.91

315
1.22

179
1.14

371
1.30

270
1.20

297
1.41

154
1.34

430
1.51

186
1.05

217
1.29

Where a range is given, the average is listed here.
PP, polypropylene; PC, polycarbonate; PBT, polybutylene terephthalate; PS, polystyrence.
c
Nylon properties are very sensitive to moisture content.
d
Deflection temperature under load.
Source: Reference 6.
b

PC

365

366

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: PLASTICS AND PLASTIC ADDITIVES

10

0% Rubber

9

10%
20%

Stress (thousand psi)

8

25%

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

To 600–700%

100%
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Strain (%)

FIGURE 18.3 The influence of discrete, micrometer-sized rubber particles on the high-speed
(133 in/in min) stress–strain curves of polystyrene [7].

portion of the volume of polymeric products (often approaching 50%), particularly for
items where low cost is more important than product performance. One of the earliest
examples of a filler is the wood flour (fine sawdust) long used in phenolic polymers and
other thermosets. Calcium carbonate is used in a variety of plastics and polypropylene is
often filled with talc. Even water has been used to extend polyester casting compounds.
Fillers may also be used to improve certain properties of the compound. Almost all of
them reduce mold shrinkage and thermal expansion coefficients. They reduce warping in
molded parts. Mica and other fillers can increase heat resistance. Hollow glass or phenolic
microspheres reduce the density of the composite. Conductive fillers, such as certain
carbon blacks and aluminum flake, impart electrical conductivity that bleeds off static
charge (important in car tires) and provides plastics with electromagnetic interference
(EMI) shielding capability. Just about any filler whose hardness and modulus are
greater than those of the polymer will increase the hardness and initial modulus of a
mixture with the polymer, but generally, elongation, ultimate strength, toughness, and
processability suffer.
18.4.3

Coupling Agents

For a reinforcing fiber, such as glass, to be of maximum benefit (or a filler not to be too
detrimental to mechanical properties), stress must be efficiently transferred from
the polymer to the reinforcing agent or the filler. Unfortunately, most inorganics have
hydrophilic surfaces, while most polymers are hydrophobic, so interfacial adhesion is poor.
This problem is exacerbated by the tendency of the surface of many inorganics (particularly
glass) to adsorb water, which further degrades adhesion by reducing the amount of
hydrogen bonds between the fibers and the polymer. Coupling agents are intended to
help overcome these difficulties.
The most common coupling agents are silanes, with the general formula YRSi(OR0 )3.
The (OR0 ) group reacts with the inorganic substrate and the Y group reacts (or at least forms

CONTENTS OF PLASTIC COMPOUNDS

367

strong secondary bonds) with the polymer, thereby enhancing interfacial adhesion. The
reaction sequence by which vinyl-triethoxysilane is believed to couple to a substrate
containing hydroxyl surface functionality (e.g., glass) is shown below.
Step 1: Hydrolysis (most likely with water adsorbed on the substrate):
H2C=CH–Si –( OC2H5)3 + 3H2O → H2C=CH–Si –( OH)3 + 3C2H5OH

Step 2: Reaction with substrate:
H2C=CH–Si –( OH)3 + HO

→ H2C=CH–Si (OH)2–O

+H2O

The “dangling double bonds” so introduced can then participate in the cure of an
unsaturated polyester resin (Example mprb2.3), covalently bonding the polymer to the
surface.
A wide variety of silane coupling agents is available, with the functional groups
optimized for use with various polymers and substrates. Titanate coupling agents perform
in a similar fashion. Fillers and reinforcing fibers are supplied pretreated with coupling
agent or the agent may be added during compounding (in which case, presumably most of it
migrates, or blooms, to the interface).
In the case of fillers, coupling agents have an added benefit. By converting an otherwise
hydrophilic surface to a hydrophobic surface, compatibility with the polymer is improved.
This results in easier and more uniform dispersion of the filler in the polymer, and at a given
filler, loading can reduce the viscosity substantially, thereby improving processability.
Graft and block copolymers often perform a coupling function in the case of rubbertoughened plastics mentioned in the discussion of reinforcing agents. In the manufacture of
high-impact polystyrene, for example, the polybutadiene is dissolved in the polymerizing
styrene monomer. As a result, some of the styrene is grafted to the rubber. The grafted
polystyrene chains are physically compatible with the surrounding homopolystyrene and
are chemically bound to the rubber, thereby enhancing adhesion between the dispersed
polybutadiene particles and the polystyrene matrix. The graft copolymer is thought to be
essential for effective impact enhancement in this particular system, because simple
mechanical blends of polystyrene and polybutadiene tend to be less homogeneous and
show little impact enhancement. However, minor amounts of styrene–butadiene block
copolymers do act as compatibilizers and, therefore, improve the impact strength of such
blends, much as a soap or a surfactant that emulsifies oil in water.
18.4.4

Stabilizers

Most polymers are susceptible to one or more forms of degradation, usually as a result of
environmental exposure to oxygen or ultraviolet (UV) radiation, or to high temperatures
during processing operations. Stabilizers inhibit degradation of the polymer. In the case of
poly(vinyl chloride), for example, the major product of thermal degradation is HCl, which,
besides being a strong acid, catalyzes further degradation. Compounds such as metal
oxides, which react with the HCl to form stable products, are used as stabilizers. Oxidative
degradation of polymers is thought to take place by a free-radical mechanism involving
crosslinking and/or chain scission initiated by free radicals from peroxides formed in the
initial oxidation step. Similarly, these reactions can be initiated by free radicals produced

368

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: PLASTICS AND PLASTIC ADDITIVES

by UV radiation (a serious threat to polymers used in cars, particularly dashboard
materials). Stabilizers against such reactions are generally quinone-type organics that are
effective free-radical scavengers.
18.4.5

Pigments

Plastics are often colored by the addition of pigments, which are finely divided solids. If the
polymer is itself transparent, a pigment imparts opacity. Titanium dioxide is a common
pigment where a brilliant, opaque white is desired. Sometimes, pigments perform other
functions. For example, calcium carbonate acts as both a filler and a pigment in many
plastics, and carbon black is often a stabilizer as well as a pigment. It prevents degradation
by absorbing and preventing the penetration of UV light beyond the surface of the material.
18.4.6

Dyes

Dyes are colored organic chemicals that dissolve in the polymer to produce a transparent
compound (assuming the polymer is transparent to begin with). Many polycarbonate
drinking bottles that are colored, yet transparent, use dyes. Some thermoplastics, though
transparent, develop a slight yellow tinge from minor degradation during processing that
causes selective absorption of light toward the blue end of the spectrum. The yellow can
largely be “canceled out” by the addition of a blue dye that reduces the transmission of
yellowish wavelengths. This technique unavoidably results in a slight lowering of the total
light transmission.
18.4.7

Plasticizers

The addition of a relatively low molecular weight organic plasticizer (often exceeding
10–20% of the polymer mass) to a normally glassy polymer will progressively reduce its
modulus by bringing the compound’s glass transition temperature down closer to use
temperature. The level at which the modulus is reduced to the point where the compound is
considered an elastomer rather than a plastic is somewhat arbitrary, but plastics sometimes
contain small amounts of a plasticizer to reduce brittleness. Plasticizers must be thermodynamically compatible with the host polymer to avoid phase separation.
Common plasticizers, such as those based on phthalates or trimellitates, have been used
frequently, particularly with poly(vinyl chloride), allowing an otherwise hard material (e.
g., drain pipes) to be used in flexible products (e.g., shower curtains or water hoses). Several
recent studies showing migration of plasticizers out of materials during their lifetime has
led to the development of more stable or less toxic plasticizers, such as citrates that are used
in medical plastics (e.g., IV bags and tubing). A recent review paper covers the major uses
of common plasticizers and discusses the numerous applications and research trends [10].
18.4.8

Lubricants

External lubricants are low molecular weight organics that are relatively insoluble in the
polymer and “plate out” or migrate to the surface of the compound and form a slippery
coating during processing operations. They produce smoother extrudates and molded
articles, and minimize sticking in the mold by acting as mold release agents. Where
subsequent painting or printing of the surface is required, they can reduce adhesion, and so

CONTENTS OF PLASTIC COMPOUNDS

369

must be used with care. Stearic acid and its metal salts are common external lubricants.
Internal lubricants are soluble in the polymer, and ease processing by lowering the
compound’s viscosity.
18.4.9

Processing Aids

Various compounds (often a second polymer) are used to modify the rheological properties
of a polymer during processing to provide higher outputs, better surface finish, and easier
handling in general. For example, low molecular weight polyethylene is added to PVC to
improve extrusion behavior.
18.4.10

Curing Agents

These are chemicals whose function is to produce a crosslinked, thermosetting plastic
from an initially linear or branched polymer. For example, a vinyl monomer, such as
styrene, a free-radical initiator, and sometimes a promoter (e.g., cobalt naphthenate, to
speed up the reaction) can be dissolved in a low molecular weight unsaturated polyester
resin, which forms crosslinks by an ordinary addition mechanism involving the
double bonds in the polyester (Example mprb2.3). Curing is also important in forming
tires, as sulfur is compounded with natural, butadiene, or isoprene rubber to form a
crosslinked rubber.
The polymer for a two-stage thermosetting compound is deliberately produced with a
stoichiometric shortage of one of the reagents to give a highly branched, but not yet
crosslinked structure, which is later cured in the mold with a curing agent. An “A-stage”
phenolic polymer is produced by reacting phenol and formaldehyde in about a 1.25:1 mol
ratio (a molal excess of formaldehyde is required for crosslinking). This still-thermoplastic
product (a novolac) is compounded with fillers, pigments, reinforcing agents, and a curing
agent, hexamethylenetetramine, to give a “B-stage” resin. The curing agent decomposes in
the presence of moisture (a product of the condensation reaction) upon heating in the mold,
giving the additional formaldehyde required for crosslinking and ammonia which acts as a
basic catalyst for the reaction:
H2
C
N

C
H2

N
H
H2C 2C
N

N
C
H2

+ 6H2O

6CH2=O

Water

Formaldehyde

+

4NH3

CH2
Ammonia

Hexamethylenetetramine

Single-stage resins (resoles) are made using the final desired reactant ratio, about 1:1.5
phenol:formaldehyde, but the reaction is stopped short of crosslinking. Crosslinking is
completed in the mold without the necessity of a curing agent.
Free-radical initiators (usually organic peroxides) are used as curing agents for saturated
thermoplastic polymers. The curing agent must be compounded with the polymer at
temperatures low enough to prevent appreciable decomposition to free radicals. The
compound is then heated in the mold, producing free radicals that abstract protons from
the polymer, leaving unshared electrons on the chains, which combine to form crosslinks:

370

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: PLASTICS AND PLASTIC ADDITIVES

Heat
R:R
Initiator
(curing agent)

H H H
C–C–C
H H H

R• +

2R•
Free radicals
H H H
C–C–C
H
H

+

R:H

Polymer chain

H H H
C–C–C
H
H

2

Polymer chain

H H H
C–C–C
H
H
H
H
C–C–C
H H H
Crosslinked chains

Sometimes, sulfur or multifunctional vinyl monomers are added to improve crosslinking efficiency by helping to “bridge the gap” (i.e., produce longer crosslinks) between
the chains. In this manner, polyethylene is crosslinked with dicumyl peroxide, converting it
from a thermoplastic to a thermoset with much greater heat resistance to stress cracking and
abrasion. It can also tolerate much higher levels of carbon black filler without becoming
excessively brittle.
18.4.11

Blowing Agents

Foamed plastics must contain a material that generates a gas to produce foaming. They are
chemical blowing agents (CBAs), which generate gas through a chemical reaction, and
physical blowing agents, inert but volatile chemicals that are dissolved in the polymer or its
precursors and simply vaporized upon heating or a reduction in pressure. As an example,
polyurethanes (Example mprb2.4Q) may be “water blown” by the reaction of excess
diisocyanate with water, generating CO2:

O=C=N–R–N=C=O + 2H2O → R(NH2)2 + 2CO2
Diisocyanate

Diamine

This is not often done in practice because of the expense of the diisocyanate and the
difficulty in controlling foam structure. Alternatively, they can be foamed with a physical
blowing agent, traditionally CCl3F or other chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). The latter gives
excellent control of foam structure and, because of its low thermal conductivity, makes
good insulating foams. Unfortunately, it poses a threat to the atmospheric ozone layer and
has been phased out for many operations. Carbon dioxide and liquefied gases are among
several alternatives to replace the CFCs.
CBAs must be compounded with a polymer below their decomposition temperatures
and then decomposed to generate the gas at temperatures low enough to prevent
degradation of the polymer. A variety of CBAs is available, covering a range of
decomposition temperatures, for use with most common plastics [11,12].
In the manufacture of polystyrene foam molding beads, pentane is added to the
monomer in a suspension polymerization or absorbed by the beads afterward. When the
beads are placed in a mold and heated (usually with steam), the pentane volatilizes,

SHEET MOLDING COMPOUND FOR PLASTICS

371

expanding the beads against each other and the mold walls. These beads are used in many
familiar applications, such as drinking cups, picnic coolers, and packaging peanuts.
18.4.12

Flame Retardants [13–15]

Most synthetic polymers, being composed largely of carbon and hydrogen, are flammable
(although no more so than natural materials such as wood and cotton—both natural
polymers, which synthetic polymers often replace—a fact sometimes overlooked). Plastics
are increasingly being compounded with flame retardants to reduce their flammability. The
most common flame-retarding additives for plastics contain large proportions of chlorine or
bromine. These elements are believed to quench the free-radical flame propagation
reactions. They may be compounds that are simply mixed with the plastic, for example,
decabromodiphenyl ether, or they may be reactive monomers that become part of the
polymer. Examples of the latter include tetrabromobisphenol-A substituted for some of the
normal bisphenol-A in epoxies (Example mprb2.4O) or polycarbonates (Example
mprb2.4N) and tetrabromophthalic anhydride used in polyesters (Example mprb2.3).
Antimony trioxide is often used in synergistic combination with halogenated compounds.
Organic phosphates are thought to function as flame retardants by forming a char that acts
as a barrier to flames. A compound such as tris(2,3-dibromopropyl) phosphate combines
halogen and phosphate. Poly(vinyl chloride), because of its chlorine content, is inherently
flame resistant, but if it is to maintain this valuable property in plasticized form, it must be
compounded with halogenated or phosphate plasticizers.
The safety of halogen and antimony flame-retardant systems has been questioned, both
the compounds themselves during processing operations and their combustion products.
They have largely been replaced with phosphorus-based systems [16]. Hydrated alumina,
another alternative, is a particulate filler that contains 35% water of hydration, the
evaporation of which absorbs energy and inhibits flame spread.
18.4.13

Miscellaneous

Various other materials are added to plastics to provide certain end-use properties. For
example, where a polymer will be subjected to a warm, humid environment (e.g., vinyl
shower curtains and silicone-rubber bathtub caulks), it often contains a biocide to inhibit
the growth of mold, mildew, and fungus. These biocides are generally organic copper,
mercury, nanosilver, or tin compounds. Fatty-acid amines are added to compounds for use
in bottles and phonograph records as antistatic agents. These chemicals, because of their
limited compatibility with the polymer, migrate (or bloom) to the surface of the material
and, because of their polarity, attract moisture from the atmosphere. The moisture bleeds
off static electricity charges, which otherwise would attract considerable dust over time.
These same fatty-acid amines also function as slip or antiblock agents, which prevent
layers of plastic film and sheet from sticking to each other. Nucleating agents, which
promote more but smaller crystallites, were discussed in Chapter 4.
18.5

SHEET MOLDING COMPOUND FOR PLASTICS

The subject of sheet molding compound (SMC) is introduced here because: (1) they are
commercially important, (2) they make use of many of the additives discussed in the

372

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: PLASTICS AND PLASTIC ADDITIVES

previous section, and (3) they do not seem to fit logically anywhere else. Sheet molding
compounds provide a high strength-to-weight ratio, with low cost and easy, rapid
processing. SMCs are easily-moldable polymer composites that are formed into sheets
with a curing agent included (which is activated during a delayed molding step). They are
used for automotive body parts such as front ends and fender extensions and for other
structural parts in such items as business copy machines and air-conditioner hosings. They,
along with RIM polyurethanes and polyureas and injection-molded thermoplastics, are in
the competition for increased use in auto body panels (doors, hoods, fenders, etc.).
SMCs consist mainly of unsaturated polyester resin (Example mprb2.3), filler (usually
CaCO3), and chopped-glass reinforcing fiber. Early SMCs contained roughly a third of
each, but newer materials are closer to 25% resin, 30% glass, and 45% filler [17]. The liquid
polyester and filler are compounded in a high-shear mixer along with minor amounts of a
curing agent (usually an organic peroxide), a thickener (MgO or CaO), an external
lubricant as a mold-release agent (zinc stearate), and sometimes a low-shrink additive.
The material leaves the mixer looking (but not smelling) like pancake batter, and is
spread continuously onto layers of polyethylene film (Figure 18.4). Chopped glass fibers
(about 1 in long) are sprinkled on, the layers are combined, and the sheet is kneaded by
rollers to wet out the glass. The sheet is then rolled up and allowed to age, which during
time. The thickens to the consistency of cardboard. This thickening is believed to involve
interaction of the MgO or CaO with the carboxylic acid groups on the polyester, with water
also playing a role, but it is not a true polymerization.
Before use, the sheets are cut to size and the polyethylene stripped off. They are then
placed in a heated compression-type mold (several layers may be stacked for greater
thicknesses) where true cure (crosslinking) of the polyester takes place.
The choice of a curing agent for a SMC involves a compromise between an active
initiator, which will give quick cures, but conversely, imparts a short shelf life to the stored
SMC, and a less active initiator with a longer shelf life but slower cure. A drawback of early
SMCs was the wavy surface and sometimes visible glass-fiber texture produced by
shrinkage of the polyester during cure. This necessitated hand-finishing operations, which
are not at all popular in the automotive industry. The low-shrink additives that counteract
this usually involve a second, linear polymer dissolved in the polyester, which precipitates

FIGURE 18.4

Sheet molding compound line.

PLASTICS RECYCLING

373

out as a micrometer-sized dispersed phase as the polyester cures. Why this should reduce
shrinkage is not at all clear, but if the low-shrink additive is a rubber, it may act as a
toughening agent as well (see Section 18.4.1).
Bulk molding compounds (BMCs) are similar in composition to SMCs, with somewhat
shorter fibers (1/4 to 1/2 in), and perhaps less glass (15%) and more filler. They are produced
in chunk form and compression molded like other thermosetting compounds.
18.6

PLASTICS RECYCLING

The recycling and reuse of plastics is important for both environmental and monetary
reasons. Just as metals are separated prior to recycling, polymers must be separated as
well. Typical recycling symbols indicate which type of plastic an item is made from
(Figure 18.5). The additives covered in the chapter make recycling difficult, as they
are generally well-mixed with the polymer host, and thermodynamically difficult to
remove. Some plastics are copolymers or blends of polymers that can also be challenging
to recycle. Impurities (i.e., the additives) can significantly alter the properties of a
material, and most of the reprocessing methods used to make new products from recycled
plastics reduce the molecular weight of the materials. Thus, recycled plastics do not find
many uses in products requiring high mechanical strength or that have a narrow range of
acceptable properties. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration requires the use of virgin
plastic materials for linings that touch a food product, thus recycled plastics are limited to
outer packaging for food applications. One reason for this is the potential for harmful
chemicals or bacteria to find their way into the void space of the original material. Recycled
plastics more often than not are used in lower-end products like garbage bags and
park benches.
The recycling process normally involves several steps of chopping, grinding, and
melting to form pellets, similar to those used for the original hopper feed for thermoplastic
processing. Thermosets, on the other hand, cannot be reprocessed by melting without
degrading the material, so after chopping, they are generally used only as filler material.

FIGURE 18.5 Plastic recycling symbols for (1) poly(ethylene terephthalate), (2) high density
polyethylene, (3) vinyl polymers, (4) low density polyethylene, (5) polypropylene,
(6) polystyrene, and (7) all other polymers.

374

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: PLASTICS AND PLASTIC ADDITIVES

PROBLEM
1

Many consumer product sold these days are advertised as being nanofiber composites
(e.g., golf clubs and tennis rackets). Give an example of the nanotechnology inside
these composites and explain why this improves the performance of the object. (Use the
Internet for assistance.)

REFERENCES
[1] Seymour, R.B. (ed. ), Additives for Plastics, Vol. 1, State of the Art, Vol. 2, New Developments,
Academic, New York, 1978.
[2] Greek, B.F., Chem. Eng. News, June 13, 1988, p. 35.
[3] Milewski, J.V. and H.S. Katz (eds), Handbook of Reinforcements for Plastics, Elsevier,
New York, 1987.
[4] Sandler, J., P. Werner, M.S.P. Shaffer, V. Demchuk, V. Altstadt, and A.H. Windle, CompositesPart A: Appl. Sci. Manufac. 33, 1033 (2002).
[5] Clegg, D.W. and A.A. Collyer (eds), Mechanical Properties of Reinforced Thermoplastics,
Elsevier, New York, 1986.
[6] Kline, G.M., Modern Plastics Encyclopedia McGraw-Hill, New York, 1990.
[7] Rosen, S.L., Trans. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 35(6), 480 (1973).
[8] Riew, C.K. (ed.), Rubber-Toughened Plastics, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC,
1989.
[9] Katz, H.S. and J.V. Milewski (eds), Handbook of Fillers for Plastics, Elsevier, New York, 1987.
[10] Rahman, M. and C.S. Brazel, Prog. Polym. Sci. 29, 1223 (2004).
[11] Heck, R.L., III, Plast. Compd., November/December 1978, p. 52.
[12] Hallans, R.S., Plast. Eng., December 1977, p. 17.
[13] Schongar, L.H., Plast. Compd., May/June 1978, p. 44.
[14] Blake, W.P., Plast. Compd., July/August 1978, p. 26.
[15] Nametz, R.C., Plast. Compd., January/February 1979, p. 31.
[16] Wood, S.A., Mod. Plast. 67(5), 40 (1990).
[17] Wigotsky, V., Plast. Eng. 47(6), 8 (1991).

CHAPTER 19

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: RUBBERS AND
THERMOPLASTIC ELASTOMERS

19.1

INTRODUCTION

A rubber is generally defined as a material that can be stretched to at least twice its original
length, and that will retract rapidly and forcibly to substantially its original dimensions on
release of the force. In contrast, an elastomer is a rubber-like material from the standpoint
of modulus but one that has limited extensibility and incomplete retraction. The most
common example is highly plasticized poly(vinyl chloride).
Rubber has the following characteristics. (1) From the molecular standpoint, a rubber
must be a high molecular weight polymer, since rubber elasticity is mainly due to the coiling
and uncoiling of long chain segments (Chapter 13). (2) For the molecules to be able to coil
and uncoil freely, the glass-transition temperature of the polymer must be above its use
temperature. (3) Furthermore, the polymer must be amorphous in its unstretched state
because crystallinity would hinder coiling and uncoiling. (4) There used to be an additional
requirement that the polymer be crosslinked (although physical entanglements act as
effective crosslinks). If it were not crosslinked, the chains would slip past one another
(undergo viscous flow) under stress and recovery would be incomplete; however, if they
were chemically crosslinked, they would be thermosets rather than thermoplastics.
19.2

THERMOPLASTIC ELASTOMERS [1,2]

The introduction of the so-called thermoplastic elastomers (actually rubbers) has gotten
around the requirement for crosslinking in the strictest sense, that of covalent bonding
between chains. They are commonly found for applications requiring flexibility in
automotives, household appliances, and soft-grip tools. The most common thermoplastic
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
Ó 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

375

376

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: RUBBERS AND THERMOPLASTIC ELASTOMERS

elastomers are styrene-b-butadiene-b-styrene (SBS) block copolymers produced in solution by anionic polymerization (Example 10.1). Since most polymer pairs are mutually
insoluble, the polystyrene chain ends aggregate together in microscopic domains. These
polystyrene domains, being below their glass transition temperature (100 oC) at normal use
temperatures, are rigid and act to tie together the long, flexible polybutadiene segments
(which are above their Tg at normal use temperature) as do ordinary crosslinks. Unlike the
usual covalent crosslinks, however, the polystyrene domains soften above the Tg of
polystyrene, and the polymer behaves as a true thermoplastic.
All thermoplastic elastomers have in common a continuous rubbery phase of “soft
segments” tied together by glassy or crystalline “hard segments” at use temperature, which
soften at elevated temperatures. Thus, thermoplastic elastomers do not have to be
vulcanized and can be processed by the usual economical thermoplastic techniques.
19.3

CONTENTS OF RUBBER COMPOUNDS

Natural rubber and, with a few exceptions, the many synthetic rubber polymers commercially available are unsaturated; that is, they contain double bonds that provide sites for
vulcanization (crosslinking) reactions. The polymers are mostly linear or branched, but
some also contain (either intentionally or unintentionally) minor amounts of gel (crosslinked particles) prior to vulcanization. This can have a profound effect on processing
properties [3,4]. The following substances are often included in rubber compounds.
19.3.1

Reinforcing Fillers

Most rubber compounds that are intended to develop a reasonable tensile strength,
abrasion, and tear resistance will contain up to 50 phr (parts per hundred parts rubber
by weight) or more of a reinforcing filler, nearly always a carbon black (thus the color of car
tires). The use of carbon black in rubbers is quite different than in plastics, where it is
strictly a pigment and limited to much lower loadings.
Carbon blacks are not simply carbon. Basic blacks have hydroxyl groups at the particle
surfaces and acid blacks have carboxylic acid functionality. It has been shown that the
rubber polymer forms strong secondary and primary covalent bonds with the carbon black,
which accounts for its reinforcing ability. A wide variety of carbon blacks is available [5].
In addition to chemical functionality, they differ in factors such as particle size, degree of
aggregation, and surface area, and different types of rubber polymers require particular
kinds of black for optimum reinforcement. Silicone rubbers are sometimes reinforced with
finely divided silica (SiO2).
Natural rubber (cis-1,4-polyisoprene) and its synthetic counterpart and butyl rubber are
among the few rubber polymers that can develop reasonable mechanical strength without
reinforcement. This is because (especially for natural rubber that has a regular tacticity)
they crystallize with molecular orientation at high elongations and the crystallites function
as a reinforcing agent, causing the sharp upturn in the stress–strain curves at high
elongations shown in Figure 19.1 [6].
19.3.2

Fillers

As with plastics, the function of fillers in rubber is mainly to reduce the cost of the
compound. Most rubber fillers are finely divided inorganics such as CaCO3. The addition of

CONTENTS OF RUBBER COMPOUNDS

377

4500

3500

Nat
ura
l

Pure gum
vulcanizates
Gas black loaded
vulcanizates

4000

Bu
tyl

2000

Buty
l

(G
RS)

2500

SB
R

Load (psi)

3000

1500
ral

1000

tu
Na

500
SBR (GR-S)
(GR-S)
SBR
0

100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Elongation (%)

800 900 1000

FIGURE 19.1 Stress–strain curves for filled and unfilled rubber vulcanizates [6]. Used with
permission of McGraw-Hill Book Company.

such high modulus fillers raises the modulus (stiffens the compound), though too much will
cause a loss of rubbery properties, all other things being equal. Carbon blacks sometimes
perform as fillers and as reinforcing agents in rubber compounds.
19.3.3

Extending Oils

Hydrocarbon oils are often used in rubber compounds. Their function is twofold. First, they
plasticize the polymer, making it softer and easier to process. This is particularly important
with very high molecular weight polymers. Second, since they are usually cheaper than the
rubber polymer, they act like fillers in reducing the cost of the compound. Extending oils
are available in various degrees of aromaticity and the properties of the compound depend
on the type of oil in relation to the polymer as well as oil level.
Carbon black and extending oils have opposite effects on the modulus of a rubber
compound. One trick for producing low-cost compounds from synthetic polymers is to
polymerize to higher-than-normal molecular weight. The modulus is cut down by the
addition of an extending oil and then brought back up to the desired level by the addition of
large amounts of black. With these ever-increasing levels of black and oil in rubber
compounds, it appears that there soon will not be any polymer left! Seriously, there is a
limit to this technique, because other properties are soon excessively degraded.
19.3.4

Vulcanizing or Curing Systems

The function of these is to crosslink the polymer. The most common curing systems are
based on sulfur. Although sulfur alone can cure unsaturated rubbers upon heating, the
process is slow and inefficient in its use of sulfur. The mechanisms of sulfur curing are not
well understood, but are thought to include (among other things) the formation of sulfide or
disulfide links between chains and the abstraction of protons from adjacent chains to form
H2S, with the chains crosslinking at the remaining unshared electrons.

378

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: RUBBERS AND THERMOPLASTIC ELASTOMERS

To speed up the vulcanization process, accelerators are generally used. These are
usually complex sulfur-containing organic compounds, often of proprietary composition.
Promoters or activators are used to improve the cure still further. Zinc oxide is a common
example, particularly in conjunction with stearic acid.
Nonsulfur cures are used occasionally. Free-radical initiators can provide crosslinks,
as discussed in Section 18.4, and zinc oxide can crosslink polymers that contain chlorine.
19.3.5

Antioxidants or Stabilizers

These are particularly important with natural rubber and the many synthetic rubbers
that contain a major proportion of butadiene or isoprene. These polymers are highly
unsaturated and the double bonds are extremely susceptible to attack by oxygen and ozone,
resulting in embrittlement, cracking, and general degradation. Since the degradation
reactions take place by free-radical mechanisms, antioxidants work by scavenging free
radicals.
19.3.6

Pigments

Where great mechanical strength is not required, and thus carbon black not used, rubbers
can be colored with pigments, just as plastics. A typical radial passenger-tire tread
formulation is shown in Table 19.1. Notice that the additives (everything except SBR
polymer and cis-polybutadiene) make up 122.25 parts per hundred parts polymer or more
than half of the tire!
TABLE 19.1 Radial Passenger-Tire Tread Formulation
phra

Ingredient

Function

b

SBR 1712
Polymer
Aromatic oil
cis-Polybutadiene 1252
Carbon black N-234
Oil-soluble sulfonic acid
Sulfur
Stearic acid
Zinc oxide
N-Cyclohexyl-2-benzotliiazole
sulfenamid
Polymerized 1,2dihydrotrimethylquinoline
N-(l,3-dimethylbutyl)-N0 -Phenylp-phenylene diamine
Blended petroleum wax
Total
a

45
37.5
55
70
1
1.75
2
3
1

Rubber polymer
Extending oil
Rubber polymer
Reinforcing agent
Processing aid
Vulcanizing agent
Promotor
Promotor
Accelerator

2

Antioxidant

1

Antiozonant

3

Crack inhibitor and antiozonant

222.25

Parts per hundred parts rubber, by weight.
Oil-extended master batch. Cold emulsion polymer 75% butadiene, 25% styrene extended with highly
aromatic oil.
Source. H. L. Stephens [7].
b

REFERENCES

19.4

379

RUBBER COMPOUNDING [7,8]

The ingredients added to a rubber (such as those in Table 19.1) must be compounded with
the rubber polymer to produce the final rubber compound for molding, extrusion, etc. This
is usually done in two-roll mills or Banbury mills (Chapter 17). Both devices are driven by
relatively large electric motors and put a lot of energy per unit time and volume into the
polymer. This energy input serves two purposes. First, it breaks down the polymer and
reduces its “nerve” to the point where it can be easily compounded and processed. Nerve is
a term used to describe the difficult-to-handle highly elastic response caused by a molecular
weight too high. This mastication step mechanically degrades the polymer, lowering its
molecular weight and, therefore, increasing its viscous response. Premastication is
particularly important with natural rubber, since its molecular weight cannot be controlled
during polymerization. Second, the high energy input breaks up and disperses the
compounding ingredients evenly throughout the polymer.
REFERENCES
[1] Legge, N.R., G. Holden, and H.E. Schroeder (eds), Thermoplastic Elastomers, Hanser,
Munich, Germany, 1987.
[2] Walker, B.M., and C.P. Rader (eds), Handbook of Thermoplastic Elastomers, 2nd ed., Van
Nostrand-Reinhold, New York, 1988.
[3] Rosen, S.L. and F. Rodriguez, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 9, 1601 (1965).
[4] Rosen, S.L. and F. Rodriguez, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 9, 1615 (1965).
[5] Byers, J.T., Fillers, Part I: Carbon black, Chapter 3 in Rubber Technology, 3rd ed., M. Morton
(ed.), Van Nostrand-Reinhold, New York, 1987.
[6] Schmidt, A.X. and C.A. Marlies, Principles of High Polymer Theory and Practice, McGrawHill, New York, 1948, p. 537.
[7] Stephens, H.L., The compounding and vulcanization of rubber, Chapter 2 in Rubber Technology,
3rd ed., M. Morton (ed.), Van Nostrand-Reinhold, New York, 1987.
[8] Barlow, F.W., Rubber Compounding, Principles, Materials and Techniques, Dekker, New York,
1988.

CHAPTER 20

POLYMER APPLICATIONS:
SYNTHETIC FIBERS

20.1

SYNTHETIC FIBERS

Although many of the polymers used for synthetic fibers are identical to those in plastics,
the two industries grew up separately with completely different terminologies, testing
procedures, etc. Many of the requirements for fabrics are stated in nonquantitative terms
such as “hand” and “drape” that are difficult to relate to normal physical property
measurements, but which can be critical from the standpoint of consumer acceptance,
and therefore the commercial success, of a fiber.
A fiber is often defined as an object with a length-to-diameter ratio of at least 100.
Synthetic fibers are spun (Chapter 17) in the form of continuous filaments, but may be
chopped to much shorter staple, which is then twisted into thread before weaving. Natural
fibers, with the exception of silk, are initially in staple form. The thickness of a fiber is most
commonly expressed in terms of denier, which is the weight in grams of a 9000-m length of
the fiber. Stresses and tensile strengths are reported in terms of tenacity, with units of
grams/denier.
20.2

FIBER PROCESSING

The polymer molecules in synthetic fibers are only slightly oriented by flow as they emerge
from the spinnerette. To develop the tensile strengths and moduli necessary for textile
fibers, the fibers must be drawn (stretched) to orient the molecules along the fiber axis and
develop high degrees of crystallinity. All successful fiber-forming polymers are crystallizable and so, from a molecular standpoint, the polymer must have polar groups, between
which strong hydrogen bonding holds the chains in a crystal lattice (e.g., polyacrylonitrile,
Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
Ó 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

380

EFFECTS OF HEAT AND MOISTURE ON POLYMER FIBERS

381

nylons), or be sufficiently regular to pack closely in a lattice held together by dispersion
forces (e.g., isotactic polypropylene).
In Chapter 17, it was pointed out that the cross section of fibers is determined by the
cross section of the spinnerette holes and the nature of the spinning process. This plays an
important role in establishing the properties of the fiber. For certain applications, the spun
fibers are textured after spinning. Carpet fibers, for example, are often given a heat twist
and/or are crimped by passing them through a pair of gear-like rollers.
20.3

FIBER DYEING

The dyeing of fibers is a complex art in itself. A successful dye must either form strong
secondary bonds to polar groups on the fiber or react to form covalent bonds with functional
groups on the polymer. Furthermore, since the fibers are dyed after spinning, the dye must
penetrate the fiber diffusing into it from the dye bath. The dye molecules cannot penetrate
the crystalline areas of the polymer, so it is mainly the amorphous regions that are dyed.
This often conflicts with the requirement of high crystallinity. The chains of polyacrylonitrile, for example, while possessing the necessary polar sites for dye attachment in
abundance, are so strongly bound to each other that it is difficult for the dye to penetrate.
For this reason, acrylic fibers usually contain minor amounts of plasticizing comonomers to
enhance dye penetration. Nonpolar, nonreactive fibers such as polypropylene, on the other
hand, have no sites to which the dye can bond even if it could penetrate. This was a problem
long with polypropylene fibers and was overcome by incorporating a finely divided solid
pigment in the polymer before melt spinning. Many of these dyes are also subject
to leaching out, as you may have observed when washing a new bright red sweater with
white clothes.
20.4

OTHER FIBER ADDITIVES AND TREATMENTS

Static electricity can be a big problem with carpets. Many carpet fibers therefore incorporate
an antistatic agent (such as quaternary ammonium salts or alkyl esters of poly(ethylene
glycol) to bleed off static charge. These additives are designed to bloom to the surface of the
host polymer reducing the build-up of static charge.
The same polar bonding sites used for dyeing fibers also make them stainable. In the
past, the finished item, a carpet, for example, would be treated with an anti-staining agent
such as a fluorocarbon telomer (such as 3M’s Scotchguard) or the anti-staining agents
could be applied to the fibers before weaving. However, many of these have gone out of use
due to toxicity and bioaccumulation problems of the fluorocarbons. Another approach is to
use bicomponent fibers that mix the feel and texture of the original fiber (e.g., using nylon
6/6 as a core fiber) with a highly stain-resistant sheath (e.g., polypropylene or Teflon).
These additives are also commonly found in many stain-resistant clothing lines.
20.5

EFFECTS OF HEAT AND MOISTURE ON POLYMER FIBERS

The polarity of the polymer also directly influences its degree of water absorption. Other
things being equal, the more polar the polymer, the higher its equilibrium moisture content

382

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: SYNTHETIC FIBERS

under any given conditions and humidity. As with dyes, however, moisture content is
reduced by strong interchain bonding. The moisture content exerts a strong influence on the
feel and comfort of fibers. Hydrophobic fibers tend to have a “clammy” feel in clothing and
can build up static electricity charges. Recent advances in athletic apparel has led to
clothing that actively wicks away moisture, using fibers that are “breathable.”
Perhaps the most important effect of moisture on polar polymers is as a plasticizer. Since
fiber-forming polymers are linear, heat acts basically as a plasticizer. This explains why
suits wrinkle on hot, humid days, and why the wrinkles can be removed by steam pressing.
“Wash-and-wear” and “permanent-press” fabrics are produced by operations that crosslink
the fibers by reacting with functional groups on the chains, such as the hydroxyls on
cellulose. The more hydrophobic polymers are inherently more wrinkle resistant because
they are not plasticized by water. Wash-and-wear shirts, therefore, usually are made of
blends of poly(ethylene terephthalate), a polyester, and cotton, about 65%/35%.

CHAPTER 21

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: SURFACE
FINISHES AND COATINGS

21.1

SURFACE FINISHES

Nearly all surface finishes and coatings, with the exception of ceramic types for hightemperature applications, are based on a polymer film of some sort. They account for the
use of a lot of polymer, but determining just how much and which polymers is not easy
because most formulations are proprietary, and production figures do not always separate
polymer and nonpolymer components. Five traditional types of surfaces finishes, lacquers,
oil paints, varnishes, enamels, and latex paints, will be discussed, along with the role the
polymers play in the finish.
21.1.1

Lacquers

One of the more widely used lacquer products is fingernail polish. A lacquer consists of a
polymer solution to which a pigment has been added. The film is formed simply by
evaporation of the solvent, leaving the pigment trapped in the polymer film. Since no
chemical change occurs in the polymer, it retains its original solubility characteristics.
Hence, a major drawback of lacquers is their poor solvent resistance.
Much of the technology of lacquers involves the development of polymers that form
tougher, more adhesive, and more stable films, and the choice of solvent systems that
provide the optimum application viscosity and minimum cost, and meet environmental
constraints. The volatility of the solvent system is also important. If volatility is too high,
the solvent will evaporate before the film has had a chance to “level,” leaving brush marks
or an “orange peel” or rough surface when sprayed. If too low, the coating will “sag”
excessively after application.

Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

383

384

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: SURFACE FINISHES AND COATINGS

A wide variety of polymers is used for lacquers. Newer systems favor acrylic polymers
for their superior chemical stability. Acrylic lacquers may also incorporate a curing
agent [1] such as hexamethoxymelamine, which crosslinks the film in a subsequent baking
operation. Crosslinking toughens the film and improves solvent resistance.
The term “spirit varnish” is an old and imprecise name for a lacquer in which the solvent
is alcohol. One example is shellac, a natural polymer secreted by the female lac bug, found
in India and Thailand. Shellac can be dissolved in alcohols and then brushed on as a glaze
and for finishing wood. Since such polymers are soluble in highly polar solvents, spirit
varnishes have rather poor water resistance.
21.1.2

Oil Paints

These popular and widely used finishes typically consist of a suspension of pigment in a
drying oil, an ester of glycerin, and unsaturated fatty acid such as linseed oil. The film is
formed by a free-radical reaction involving atmospheric oxygen that polymerizes and
crosslinks the drying oil through its double bonds. Sometimes an inert solvent (mineral
spirits, turpentine) is added to control viscosity, and catalysts (e.g., cobalt naphthenate) are
used to promote the crosslinking reaction. Oil paints, once cured, are no longer soluble,
although they may be swelled and softened considerably by appropriate solvents (as used in
paint removers).
21.1.3

Oil Varnish or Varnish

Varnishes are commonly used to coat wood, and provide protection from weather and
humidity. These coatings consist of a polymer, either natural or synthetic, dissolved in a
drying oil, with perhaps an inert solvent to control viscosity and a catalyst to promote the
crosslinking reaction with oxygen. When cured, they produce a clear, tough, solventresistant film.
21.1.4

Enamel

An enamel is a pigmented oil varnish. It is much like an oil paint except that the added
polymer provides a tougher, glossier film.
21.1.5

Latex Paints

These versatile finishes have largely replaced oil paints and enamels for home use because
of their quick drying, low odor, and water cleanup properties. Basically, they are polymer
latexes, produced by emulsion polymerization (Chapter 12), often of acrylic polymers, to
which pigments and rheological-control agents have been added.
The paint film is formed by coalescence of the polymer particles upon evaporation of the
water. The polymer itself is not water soluble. Although they are sometimes termed “watersoluble” paints, this is a serious misnomer, as is well known to anyone who has tried to
clean a paintbrush after the water has evaporated. As long as the individual latex particles
have not coalesced, they are water-dispersable.
In order that the particles coalesce to form a film when the water evaporates, the polymer
must be deformable under the action of surface-tension forces. Thus, polymers for latex
paints must be near or above their glass transition temperatures at use temperature. This
formerly resulted in a rather soft paint film, which inherently lacked “scrubability.”

SOLVENTLESS COATINGS

385

Reasonable resistance to abrasion can be achieved by the incorporation of fairly large
particle size inorganic filler-pigments such as CaCO3. The rough paint film that results
scatters reflected light and therefore has a “flat” finish, a characteristic of all early latex
paints. By incorporating a low-volatility leveling solvent, latex “enamels” (they are not true
enamels in the traditional sense) are produced. The polymer is formulated to have a Tg
above use temperature. It is plasticized by the solvent so that its Tg is below application
temperature, allowing the particles to coalesce to form a film. Over a period of a day or so
after application, the solvent evaporates, leaving the hard, scrub-resistant, high-Tg polymer
film, with a reasonable gloss if desired.
Early latex paints were based on styrene–butadiene copolymers or poly(vinyl acetate).
These have been largely supplanted by paints based on acrylic latices (acrylates,
ROOCH¼CH2, or methacrylates, ROOCCH3¼CH2), because of the acrylics’ superior
chemical stability and, therefore, resistance to color change and degradation.
Much work has gone into adjusting the formulations of latex paints to allow high
pigment contents and thick films for one-coat coverage, together with reasonable ease of
application. The main rheological property desired is thixotropy (Chapter 14), which gives
a high viscosity to prevent the settling of pigments and sagging and dripping of the applied
film, together with a lower viscosity under the shearing of brushing or rolling for easy
application. These properties are achieved by the addition of finely divided inorganics and
water-soluble polymers.
21.2

SOLVENTLESS COATINGS

Traditionally, the application of most surface finishes has been accompanied by the
evaporation of an organic solvent. These evaporated solvents are now recognized as a
significant source of air pollution. Moreover, since the hydrocarbon crunch, it has become
economically undesirable simply to lose them to the atmosphere. Although the water-based
latex paints have gone a long way toward eliminating these problems, the coatings
produced are sometimes lacking in thickness, uniformity, and durability. As a result,
there is considerable interest in solventless or 100% solids coatings.
Two techniques for producing surface coatings without solvent evaporation, plastisol
coating and fluidized-bed coating, were discussed earlier. Like the latter, electrostatic
spraying makes use of a polymer powder. The powder is sprayed past an electrode,
charging the particles, and onto a heated substrate with the opposite charge. The powder
contacting the substrate melts to form a continuous film. Thermosets may be further ovencured, if necessary. The resulting film is usually quite uniform. Another advantage of this
process over traditional spraying of either latex- or solvent-based paints is that the material
that is sprayed but not actually deposited on the surface (overspray) can be recovered and
recycled back to the same process. Since overspray may account for much of the material
sprayed, this can be economically significant.
The other approach to 100% solids coatings is to carry out the polymerization reaction
right on the surface. Reactive liquid monomer or oligomer (low molecular weight polymer)
is deposited on the surface and polymerized there. The reactants may be two components or
a condensation pair (e.g., epoxies, Example 2.4O, or polyurethanes, Example 2.4Q), which
are mixed just prior to the application and heat-cured on the surface, or they may be
unsaturated materials that undergo addition polymerization (acrylates, ROOC-CH¼CH2,
because of their high reactivity, are favored here).

386

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: SURFACE FINISHES AND COATINGS

In radiation curing processes, addition reactions are activated by various forms of
radiation: infrared, microwave, radio frequency, gamma rays, ultraviolet (UV), and electron
beam [2,3]. Basically, the energies of the first three are such that they simply thermally activate
the system, that is, heat it, and are used in conjunction with the usual free-radical initiators.
Gamma rays generate free radicals in polymer solutions (or in any solution for that
matter) and are generated by the radioactive decay of certain elements, such as 60Co. Due to
the radioactivity, these systems are not frequently used, but the newly formed free radicals
can effectively crosslink polymers in solution. However, the gamma rays also cause some
degradation, so the resulting material may have reduced mechanical properties compared
to other curing methods.
UV-cured systems have achieved significant commercial importance, not only as
coatings but also as printing inks, as a result of their low energy requirements (as compared
to heat-cured systems) and freedom from pollution. They are also used in dental fillings,
where multifunctional prepolymers are cured by UV light. They are highly crosslinked to
prevent shrinkage within the tooth. The polymeric portion of a typical UV-cured coating
has three main ingredients: (1) a reactive oligomer, (2) a multifunctional acrylate
monomer, and (3) a photoinitiator. The reactive oligomer can be just about any low
molecular weight polymer containing at least a couple of alkene double bonds, preferably
acrylate double bonds because of their high reactivity. A simple example would be the
system formed by reacting an excess of 1,6-hexanediol, HO-(CH2)6-OH, with adipic acid,
HOOC-(CH2)4-COOH. The resulting hydroxyl-capped polyester is then condensed with
acrylic acid, HOOC-CH¼CH2, to give the diacrylate polyester:
H O
O
O
O H
H2C=C–C–O (–CH2 )–6 –[ O–C (–CH2 )–4 C–O (–CH2 )–6 ]–x O–C–C=CH2

This material, being tetrafunctional (two double bonds), will cure in an addition
polymerization, but the crosslink density tends to be too low and, even though x is kept
low, the viscosity is too high for many applications, so it is diluted with a multifunctional
acrylate monomer such as trimethylol propane triacrylate:
H3C–CH2–C (–CH2–OOC–CH=CH2 )–3

This reduces the viscosity of the mix for easier formulation and increases the crosslink
density in the cured film.
The film is cured by free radicals generated by the UV-induced decomposition of a
photoinitiator, for example, benzoin methyl ether:
O H
C–C
O
CH3

O
hv

C•

H
+

C•
O
CH3

Another common UV-curing agent is dimethoxy phenyl acetophenone.
Electron-beam curing systems are similar in composition. Although they have been
around a long time, they have the disadvantage of a high capital investment required to
produce the electrons and the need to shield the equipment (stray X-rays are generated).
Nevertheless, for highly pigmented systems, where UV radiation tends to be absorbed
preferentially near the surface, they offer more uniform cures. The economics are

MICROENCAPSULATION

387

reasonable for high-volume applications; therefore, as equipment continues to improve,
electron beam systems should increase in importance.
The chemistry of polymers for high-solids coatings has been extensively reviewed [4].
21.3

ELECTRODEPOSITION [5,6]

The process of electrodeposition has been developed to provide uniform, highly adhesive,
corrosion-resistant primer coats, particularly for the automotive industry. (The ultimate
solution to the corrosion problem is simply to replace metal with plastic, as is done for
many applications.) In the most common form of the process, polymers that contain
carboxylic acid functionalities are produced. These polymers are then “solubilized” in an
aqueous medium by partial neutralization with a base to give macroanions (P represents a
polymer backbone): the macroanions are believed to exist as micelles.
O
O
O
P (–C–OH)n + mBOH → (HO–C)–n—
P
–C–O
(
)m + mB+ + mH2O
–m
Macrocarboxylic
acid

Base

Macroanion

The part to be coated is made an anode (þ) and immersed in a tank containing the
macroanion solution plus pigment, plasticizer, curing agent, and other additives. The
applied electric field draws the macroanions to the surface where they lose their charge and
are deposited as a film. From the standpoint of forming a continuous, uniform, and,
therefore, highly corrosion-resistant film, this process has significant advantages. The
electric field draws the particles into all the nooks and crannies of the part (good “throwing
power”). Sharp exterior corners, which in other processes tend to be thinly coated because
of the surface tension that draws the material away from the corner, produce a stronger
electric field and, thus, attract more polymer. Because the deposited coating is a dielectric,
the field is stronger at holes in the film, preferentially attracting polymer to seal the hole.
Furthermore, pollution and fire hazards are minimized and the process wastes very little
material (unlike spraying), offering economic advantages.
A cationic process can also be used. Theoretically, it offers the best potential for rust
resistance. This process is based on amine-functional polymers treated with an acid:
P (–NR2)n + mHX → (R2N)–n—
–NR2H +)m + mX –m P (
Acid

Macrocation

The macrocations are then deposited on a cathodic substrate.
Following electrodeposition, objects are usually rinsed to remove any non-adhering
material and then baked to dry and fuse the film, and perhaps crosslink it.
21.4

MICROENCAPSULATION

Microencapsulation is a way of coating materials while ending up with a powder or very
fine particles. Polymers are particularly useful, as they can form continuous thin films while
in the liquid state and then harden upon cooling or drying of a solvent. Microcapsules are

388

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: SURFACE FINISHES AND COATINGS

perhaps best known in the field of pharmaceuticals, where a drug can be trapped inside a
polymer shell that is used to prevent release of the drug until the capsule reaches a desired
location for best pharmacological effect. They are also commonly used in agriculture (for
controlled release of fertilizers and pesticides), the food industry (e.g., to keep ingredients
such as omega-3 fatty acids shelf-stable without spoiling prior to consumption), cosmetics,
and industrial processes.
Nearly any polymer can be used to form a coating, although the food and pharmaceutical fields have a narrow list of materials approved for human ingestion. Many such
microcapsules are made using natural polymers or derivatives of natural polymers, such as
gelatin, cellulose derivatives, and alginates (from seaweed). The process of forming
microcapsules requires three main steps:
- dispersion,
- film coating, and
- hardening.
In the dispersion phase, the core ingredient to be encapsulated must be separated into tiny
droplets or solid particles through methods such as high-shear mixing, atomization with a

FIGURE 21.1 Microencapsulation methods include (a) fluidized bed coating and (b) rotating disk
dispersion. Uniform coating around a core can be seen in (c). Image in (a), courtesy of Coating Place,
Inc. Images in (b) and (c), courtesy of Southwest Research Institute .

REFERENCES

389

gas, or using rotational energy to form droplets. One method of coating solid core materials
is fluid-bed coating (Figure 21.1a), where the solid particles are dispersed by a stream of air
and then a polymer solution is sprayed into the unit. The polymer sticks to the surfaces of
the particles and the air (which is often heated) evaporates the solvent to harden the coating;
the longer the polymer is sprayed into the fluidized bed coater, the thicker the coating (as
shown in Figure 21.1c). The dispersion phase can also be done at the same time as the film
coating, as shown in a rotating disc encapsulation system (Figure 21.1b), where a usually
molten polymer surrounds the core and is flung off a fast-spinning plate after which the
polymer hardens by cooling in air before being collected as a powder. Besides fluidized bed
coating and rotating disc technologies, other methods used for microencapsulation include
spray drying, coacervation, solvent evaporation during high shear mixing, coextrusion, and
pan coating [7].
PROBLEM
1

One method of making microcapsules is fluidized bed coating. If 10 kg of iron oxide
(Fe3O4) magnets with 25 mm diameter are fluidized with air and a 10 wt% gelatin
solution is sprayed in constantly at 50 g/min, how long will it take to coat all of the
magnets with a 1 mm thick coating of gelatin (when dry)? (Note: You will need to look
up the densities of the materials and use your knowledge of the geometry of solid
objects.)

REFERENCES
[1] Morgans, W.M., Outlines of Paint Technology, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 1990.
[2] McGinnis, V.D. and G.W. Gruber, Curing methods for coating, Chapter 35 in Applied Polymer
Science, 2nd ed., R.W. Tess and G. W. Poehlein (eds), American Chemical Society, Washington,
DC, 1985.
[3] Randell, D.R. (ed.), Radiation Curing of Polymers, The Royal Society of Chemistry,
London, 1987.
[4] Athey, R.D., Jr., Prog. Org. Coatings 7, 289 (1979).
[5] Beck, F., Prog. Org. Coatings 4, 1 (1976).
[6] Brewer, G.E.F., Electrodeposition of paint, Chapter 34 in Applied Polymer Science, 2nd ed., R.W.
Tess and G. W. Poehlein (eds.), American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 1985.
[7] Deasy, P.B., Microencapsulation and Related Drug Processes, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1984.

CHAPTER 22

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: ADHESIVES

22.1

ADHESIVES

Adhesives have been a technologically important application of polymers for thousands of
years. Many of the early natural adhesives are still used. These include starch and proteinbased formulations such as hydrolyzed collagen from animal hides, hooves, and bones, and
casein from milk. As new adhesive formulations based on synthetic polymers (often the
same polymers used in other applications) continue to be developed, the range of
applications for adhesives has expanded dramatically [1–7].
An adhesive has been defined as a substance capable of holding materials (adherends)
together by surface attachment. Adhesives offer a number of significant advantages as a
means of bonding. (1) They are often the only practical means available, particularly in the
case of small adherends. For example, it is hard to imagine welding abrasive grains to a
paper backing to make sandpaper or bolting the grains together to make a grinding wheel.
(2) In the adhesive joining of large adherends, forces are fairly uniformly distributed over
large areas of the adherend, resulting in low stresses, and holes (necessary for riveting or
bolting), which invariably act as stress concentrators in the adherends, are eliminated, thus
lowering the possibility of adherend failure. (3) In addition to joining, adhesives may also
act as seals against the penetration of fluids. In the case of corrosive fluids, this, coupled
with the absence of holes, where corrosion usually gains an initial foothold, can minimize
corrosion problems. (4) In terms of weight, it does not take much adhesive to join much
larger adherends. Usually, a molecular thickness of the glue is adequate. Hence, it is not
surprising that many high-performance adhesives were originally developed for aerospace
applications. (5) Adhesive joining may offer economic advantages, often by reducing the
hand labor necessary for other bonding techniques.

Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
Ó 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

390

ADHESIVES

391

A detailed treatment of the science of adhesion is beyond the scope of this chapter.
Nevertheless, some important generalizations will be drawn [8,9]. Adhesion results from
(1) mechanical bonding between the adhesive and adherend, and (2) chemical forces—
either primary covalent bonds or polar secondary bonds—between the two surfaces. The
latter are thought to be the more important, and this explains in part why inert nonpolar
polymeric substrates, such as polyethylene and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), present
challenges to forming adhesive bonds (the process for bonding PTFE to cookware is a
closely guarded trade secret of DuPont). To adhere these kinds of polymers to a surface,
they must first be chemically treated to introduce polar sites on the surface. To promote
mechanical bonding, adherend surfaces are often roughened before joining, but this is
sometimes counterproductive. It can trap air bubbles at the bottom of crevices that act as
stress concentrators and promote failure in rigid adhesives.
The strength of adhesion can be measured using an automated materials testing system,
such as the one described in Chapter 16. By pulling the bond apart (e.g., by applying axial
tension), the work of adhesion can be measured. Peel tests are also commonly done, and
these largely resemble pulling a piece of tape (or a Band-AidÒ ) off a surface.
With good bonding between adhesive and adherend, joint failure is cohesive (the
adhesive itself or the substrate fails). Where the adhesive is weaker than the substrate, to a
good approximation, the properties of the adhesive polymer determine the properties of the
adhesive joint, that is, the bond can be no stronger than the glue line. Brittle polymers give
brittle joints, polymers with high shear strengths give bonds of high shear strength, heatresistant polymers produce bonds with good heat resistance, and so on.
To form a successful joint, the adhesive must intimately contact the adherend surface.
First this requires that it wet the surface. The subject of wetting is considered in detail in a
number of sources on surface chemistry [10,11]. In general, wetting is promoted by polar
secondary forces between adhesive and substrate. This is another reason why low-polarity
polymeric adherends such as polyethylene and PTFE are difficult to bond with adhesives.
To insure proper wetting and interfacial bonding, it is often necessary to clean the adherend
surfaces carefully before joining [12]. Good contact also requires a viscosity low enough
under conditions of application to allow the adhesive to flow over the surface and into its
nooks and crannies. Once contact has been established, the adhesive must harden to
provide necessary joint strength. There are five general categories of organic adhesive that
accomplish these objectives in different ways.
22.1.1

Solvent-Based Adhesives

Here the adhesive polymer is made to flow by dissolving it in an appropriate solvent. Thus,
the polymers used must be linear or branched to allow solution, and the joints formed will
not be resistant to solvents of the type used initially to dissolve the polymer. To get a good
bond, it helps if the solvent attacks the adherend also. In fact, solvent alone is often used to
“solvent weld” polymers, dissolving some of the adherend surface to make it sticky and
form an adhesive on application.
One of the drawbacks to solvent-based adhesives based on rigid polymers is the
shrinkage that results when the solvent evaporates. This can set up stresses that weaken
the joint. An example of this type of adhesive is the familiar model airplane cement,
basically a cellulose nitrate solution, with perhaps some plasticizer. Rubber cements, of
course, maintain their flexibility, but cannot support as great a stress. Commercial rubber

392

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: ADHESIVES

cements are based on natural, SBR (poly(butadiene-co-styrene)), nitrile (poly(butadieneco-acrylonitrile)), chloroprene (poly(2-chlorobutadiene)), and reclaimed (devulcanized)
rubbers. Examples are household rubber cement and PliobondÒ . Rubber cements may also
incorporate a curing agent to crosslink the polymer after application and evaporation of the
solvent. This greatly increases solvent resistance and strength.
22.1.2

Latex Adhesives

These materials are based on polymer latexes made by emulsion polymerization. They flow
easily while the continuous water phase is present and dry by evaporation of the water,
leaving behind a layer of polymer. In order that the polymer particles coalesce to form a
continuous joint and be able to flow to contact the adherend surfaces, the polymers used
must be above their glass transition temperature at use temperature. These requirements are
similar to those for latex paints, so it is not surprising that some of the same polymers are
used in both applications, for example, styrene-butadiene copolymers and poly(vinyl
acetate). Nitrile and neoprene rubbers are used for increased polarity. A familiar example
of a latex adhesive is “white glue,” basically a plasticized poly(vinyl acetate) latex. Latex
adhesives have displaced solvent-based adhesives in many applications because of their
reduced pollution and fire hazards. They are used extensively for bonding pile and backing
in carpets.
22.1.3

Pressure-Sensitive Adhesives [13]

These are really viscous polymer that melts at room temperature, so the polymers used
must be above their glass transitions. They are caused to flow and contact the adherends by
applied pressure, and when the pressure is released, the viscosity is high enough to
withstand the stresses produced by the adherends, which obviously cannot be very great.
The key property for a polymer used in this application is tack; thus low molecular weight
additives, which can compose up to 40 wt% of the adhesive, that increase tack are called
tackifiers. Tack basically means that the polymer has a low enough viscosity to permit good
surface contact, yet is high enough to resist separation under stress, something on the order
of 104–106 cp [14], although elasticity probably also plays a role. Natural, SBR, and
reclaimed rubbers are common in this application, although weaker adhesives have found
one important use: Post-itÒ notes. The many varieties of pressure-sensitive tape are faced
with this type of adhesive.
Contact cements are a variation in which the rubbery polymer is applied to each
adherend surface in the form of a solution or, increasingly, a latex. Evaporation of the
solvent or water leaves a polymer film with the tack necessary to grab and hold the
adherends when they are pressed together.
22.1.4

Hot-Melt Adhesives

Thermoplastics often form good adhesives simply by being melted to cause flow and then
solidifying on cooling after contacting the surfaces under moderate pressure. Polyamides
and poly(ethylene-co-vinyl acetate) are used frequently as hot-melt adhesives. Electric
“glue guns,” which operate on this principle, are readily available in the consumer market
(through hardware and craft stores).

ADHESIVES

22.1.5

393

Reactive Adhesives

These compounds are either monomers that are low molecular weight polymers, which
solidify by a polymerization and/or crosslinking reaction after application. They can
develop tremendous bond strengths and have good solvent resistance and good (for
polymers, anyhow) high-temperature properties. The most familiar example of reactive
adhesives are the epoxies (Example 2.4O) generally cured by multifunctional amines.
These are often sold as two-part epoxies, where the two components are kept in physically
separated chambers and contact each other to start the reaction when applied to a surface.
Polyurethanes (Example 2.4Q) also make excellent reactive adhesives.
The a-alkyl cyanoacrylate “super glues” (“one drop holds 5000 lbs”) are now a familiar
part of the consumer market. Originally, the monomers had extremely low viscosities and
so could crawl into narrow crevices and wet the adherend surfaces rapidly. On the other
hand, they would not fill gaps and were absorbed into porous adherends, giving poor bonds.
Newer versions are available with higher viscosities to overcome these drawbacks.
Cyanoacrylates can polymerize in seconds by an anionic addition reaction believed
initiated by hydroxyl ions from water adsorbed on the adherend surfaces:
O
x H2C=C–C–OR
CN

OH -

OR
H C=O
HO –[ C–C ]––x H
H CN

Unfortunately (or fortunately, if you stick your fingers together), being linear and polar,
they have poor resistance to polar solvents (acetone is a good solvent), and they are subject
to hydrolysis and so have poor environmental stability. Octyl cyanoacrylate, where the R
group is C8H17, is better known as DermabondÒ , and has been used in medicine to seal
wounds with a strong bond while also creating a barrier to bacteria that may infect a wound
during the healing process. Here, the adhesion bonds are meant to slowly dissolve or wear
away, replaced by the healed tissue. Other reactive surgical glues, such as fibrin glues, are
based on natural proteins that are part of the blood coagulation cascade, and can be used to
seal internal wounds.
Phenolic and other formaldehyde condensation polymers are also important reactive
adhesives. Powdered phenolic resin is mixed with abrasive grains and the mixture is
compression molded to form grinding wheels. A B-stage phenolic (see Chapter 18.4 on
polymer additives, curing agents) in a solvent is used to impregnate tissue paper. The
solvent is evaporated and the dry sheets are placed between layers of wood in a heated
press, where the resin first melts and then cures, bonding the wood to form plywood.
Similarly, sheets of paper impregnated with a B-stage melamine–formaldehyde resin are
laminated and cured to form the familiar Formica countertops.
Unlike the previous examples of reactive adhesives, the phenolics and other formaldehyde condensation polymers evolve water as they cure. If trapped in the joint, this can result
in serious weakness, which limits their adhesive applications.
Note that all these examples of reactive adhesives are highly polar polymers that often
possess side groups with strong dipoles. It is largely the polarity and secondary bonds that
account for their good bonding capabilities.

394

POLYMER APPLICATIONS: ADHESIVES

REFERENCES
[1] Temin, S.C., Adhesive compositions, p. 547 in Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Engineering, 2nd ed., Vol. 1, J. Kroschwitz (ed.), Wiley, New York, 1985.
[2] Patrick, R.L., Chemistry and technology of adhesives, Chapter 34 in Applied Polymer Science,
J.K. Craver and R.W. Tess (eds), American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 1975.
[3] Shields, J., Adhesives Handbook, 3rd ed., Butterworths, London, 1984.
[4] Hartshorne, S.R. (ed.), Structural Adhesives: Chemistry and Technology, Plenum, New York,
1986.
[5] Wake, W.C., Adhesion and the Formulation of Adhesives, 2nd ed., Applied Science, London,
1982.
[6] Wake, W.C. (ed.), Synthetic Adhesives and Sealants, Wiley, New York, 1987.
[7] Landrock, A.H., Adhesives Technology Handbook, Noyes, Park Ridge, NJ, 1985.
[8] Gent, A.N. and G. R. Hamed, Adhesion, p. 476 in Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and
Engineering, 2nd ed., Vol. 1, J. Kroschwitz (ed.), Wiley, New York, 1985.
[9] Meyer, F.J., Bonding, p. 518 in Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Engineering, 2nd ed.,
Vol. 1, J. Kroschwitz (ed.), Wiley, New York, 1985.
[10] Adamson, A.W., Physical Chemistry of Surfaces, 5th ed., Wiley, New York, 1990.
[11] Hiemenz, P.C., Principles of Colloid and Surface Chemistry, 2nd ed., Dekker, New York, 1986.
[12] Wegman, R.F., Surface Preparation Techniques for Adhesive Bonding, Noyes, Park Ridge,
NJ, 1989.
[13] Sates, D.(ed.), Handbook of Pressure-Sensitive Adhesives, 2nd ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold,
New York, 1987.
[14] Skeist, I., Adhesive compositions, p. 482 in Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Technology,
Vol. 1, N. Bikales (ed.), Wiley, New York, 1971.

INDEX

ABS, 364
Accelerators, 378
Acetal, 25
Acid. See also names of acids, 6, 13
Acrilan , 354
Acrylic acid, 18
Acrylic fibers, 354, 381
Acrylic monomers, 385, 386
Acrylic polymers, 386
Activation energy, 92, 155–156, 182, 259–262
Activators, 378
Addition polymerization, 17–19, 131, 146–180
anionic, 186–193
kinetics, 192–193
atom transfer radical, 195
cationic, 185–186
free-radical, 146–180
average chain lengths, 153–173
chain transfer, 157–160
distributions, 160–165
kinetics of, 149–153, 176–180
mechanism of, 147–148
gelation, 148–149
group-transfer, 194–195
heterogeneous stereospecific, 196–202
Addition polymers, 17–19
Additives, 363

Adherends, 390
Adhesives, 2, 390–393
hot-melt, 392
latex, 392
pressure-sensitive, 392
reactive, 393
solvent-based, 391–392
Alcohol, 6, 13
Alkali-metal salt, 186
Alkyl vinyl ethers, 186
Aluminum triethyl, 196
Amines, 6, 14
Amino acid, 16
Ammonium persulfate, 146, 174, 175
Amorphous polymers, 46, 51–53, 91, 375
molecular motions in, 92
Anionic addition polymerization, 186–193
Anionic addition polymers, 63, 186–193
Anionic, kinetics, 191–193
Antiblock agent, 371
Antioxidants, 378
Aramid, 57, 363
Arrhenius equation, 142, 155
A-stage resin, 369
Atactic polypropylene, 41
Atactic structures, 40–42
Autoacceleration, 220

Fundamental Principles of Polymeric Materials, Third Edition. Christopher S. Brazel and Stephen L. Rosen.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

395

396

INDEX

Average molecular weights, 62–65, 76
cumulative, 166–169
determination of, 66–75, 79–85
number, 62
viscosity, 72–73
weight, 63
Average velocity, 267
Azobisisobutyronitrile, 146
Banbury mixer, 356
Benzoyl peroxide, 146
Berry number, 118
Biocide, 371
Bisulfite, 175
Block copolymerization, 187, 194
Block copolymers, 21, 53, 187, 194, 376
Blow extrusion, 338, 346
Blowing agents, 370–371
Blow molding, 347–348
Boiling-point elevation, 67
Boltzmann distribution, 92
Boltzmann superposition principle, 293–297
Bonding, 35–40
action of solvents, 38
dipole interaction, 37
distances, 37
hydrogen, 36, 37, 40, 99, 111
ionic, 36–37
primary covalent, 36–37
strengths, 36–37
temperature response, 37–38
types of, 35
van der Waals, 35
Bonds, 4
double, 6, 17–19, 23, 42, 146, 147, 367
Branched polymers, 21–22, 50
as thermoplastic, 37
Branching coefficient, 138–140
Branch unit, 138–140
B-stage resin, 369
Bulk molding compound, 373
Bulk polymerization, 220–225
Butadiene, 43
n-Butyllithium, 186, 189
Calendering, 349–350
Caliber, 25
Carbon black, 366, 368, 376–378
Carbon-carbon backbone, 4, 40
Carboxylic acid, 6, 13
Carothers’ equation, 134
Carreau model, 258

Casting, 351–352
solution, 351
Catalyst, 185, 196–202
deactivation, 200–201
Phillips, 196
single-site, 202
Ziegler-Natta, 196–197
Cationic polymerization, 185–186
Cavity, 340–341
Celcon , 25
Cellophane, 69
Cellulose, 38
Cellulose esters, 38, 362
Chain-growth polymerizations, 146
Chain length, 13, 63
average, 63, 75–79
cumulative, 166–173
distribution of, 75–78, 83–85, 133–137,
160–164
instantaneous, 153–155, 165–166
kinetic, 154
number-average, 62
weight-average, 62–63
Chains, 20–21, 40, 46, 136–137
distribution of lengths, 75–78, 83–85,
133–137, 160–164
internal mobility of, 95
network, 246
stiffness of, 96
Chain transfer, 157–160, 196
Chain-transfer agent, 158–160, 173, 196, 220,
225, 230
Chain-transfer constant, 158–159
Characteristic time, 288–289
Charge-transfer complexes, 216–217
Chlorinated waxes, 123
Chromatography
gel permeation, 79–85
size exclusion, 79–85
Cohesive energy density, 112
Colbalt naphthenate, 384
Colligative property measurements, 67–69
Combination, 148, 163–165
Complex modulus, 298
Complex viscosity, 298
Compliance, 281
creep, 281
Compounding, 355–357, 379
Compression molding, 342
Condensation, 12
Condensation polymers, 13–17, 131–144
q-Condition, 119

INDEX

Cone-and-plate viscometers, 313–314
Consistency, 256
Constitutive relations, 256
Contact cements, 392
Continuous distribution
of chain lengths, 75–79, 83–85, 133–137,
160–164, 189, 190
of molecular weights, 75–79
of relaxation times, 290
of retardation times, 290
Continuous stirred tank reactors, 171, 193,
214–215, 232–233
Conversion, 134, 151
composition and, 210–216
gel point, 138–141
Copolymerization, 207–217
block, 187
effect on Tg, 97
ideal, 209–210
influence on properties, 101–102
kinetics, 216–217
mechanism, 213
reactivity ratio significance, 209
variation of composition with conversion,
210–216
Copolymers, 20–22
block, 21, 53, 187, 367, 375
graft, 21–22, 367
random, 20, 53, 97, 101–102
statistical, 20
styrene-butadiene, 20, 175, 190–191, 375
Couette flow, 311–312
Couette viscometer, 311–313
Counter ions, 186
Coupling agents, 366–367
Creep
compliance, 281, 306
recovery, 280, 290, 305
response, 284, 286, 291
tests, 280, 290
Creslan , 354
Critical micelle concentration, 174
Crosslinked polymers, 19, 22–23, 27–29, 37, 38,
108, 352, 369–370, 375
Crosslinking, 23, 108, 137–142, 342, 369–370
effects of, 103
solubility and, 108
Crystalline melting point, 46, 93, 97–103, 361
Crystalline polymers, 46, 47
Crystallinity, 46–50, 56–58
density as measure of, 49
effects of, 48–53

397

extended-chain crystals, 56–57
folded-chain crystallites, 55–56
fringed micelle model, 53–54
liquid-crystal polymers, 57–59
requirements for, 46–47
spherulites, 55–56
Crystallites, 47
extended-chain, 56–57
folded-chain, 55–56
Cumulative average chain lengths, 166–173
Cumulative copolymer composition, 210–216
Curing, 12, 22, 339, 352, 385–387
electron-beam, 386
radiation, 386
ultraviolet, 386
Curing agents, 369–370
Curing systems, 377–378
Cyanoacrylate adhesives, 393
Dacron , 24, 100
Damping, 316, 322
Dead-stop polymerization, 152
Deborah number, 270, 288–289, 306, 323
Decomposition, 147
Degree of polymerization, 14
Degree of unsaturation, 23
Delrin , 25
Denier, 380
Density
cohesive energy, 112
as measure of crystallinity, 49
of polyethylene, 50
high, 50, 225
linear-low, 50, 225
low, 50, 223
medium, 50
Diacids, 14, 20, 23, 135, 188
Dialcohol, 14
Diamines, 14, 20, 135
Dicumyl peroxide, 370
Diene polymers, 18–19, 42–44
Dienes, 18
1,4-Dienes, 18, 42
Dies, 344–345, 353
Die swell, 345
Differential refractometers, 80
Differential scanning colorimetry, 93–94
Difunctional monomers, 13, 15, 132
Diisocyanate, 15, 25, 31
Dilatant, 253
Dilute solutions, 118
2,6-Dimethylphenol, 25

398

INDEX

Dioctyl phthalate, 103, 123, 124
Diol, 14–15, 188
Dipole, 6
Dipole interaction bonding, 36–38
Dipole moments, 113
Disk-plate viscometer, 314–316
Disproportionation, 148, 154, 161, 164, 186
Dissociation energy, 36, 38
Distribution
Boltzmann, 92
most probable, 133, 136, 161, 189
Poisson, 189
Distributions of molecular weight, 75–78,
83–85, 132–133, 136–137, 160–165,
189–190, 201–202
Double bonds, 17, 18, 23, 42, 141, 144, 146, 185,
367, 369
Drag reduction, 269–271
Drying oil, 144, 384
Dry spinning, 353
Ductile deformation, 362
Dyeing, 381
Dyes, 368, 381
Dynamic mechanical testing, 95, 297–304,
316–323
Einstein equation, 120
Elasticity, 239–248
energy, 241–245, 286
entropy, 241–245, 286
statistics, 246–248
thermodynamics, 239–245
types of, 241–242
Elastic recovery, 285
Elastomers, 2, 375
thermoplastic, 375–376
Electrodeposition, 387
Electron-beam curing, 386–387
Electrostatic spraying, 385–386
Elution volume, 80, 81
Emulsion, 174
Emulsion polymerization, 173–180,
232–234, 384
kinetics of, 175–180
Enamel, 384
End-group analysis, 66–67
Energy
activation, 92, 155–156, 182, 259–262
cohesive density, 112
dissociation, 36, 37
elasticity, 98, 241, 286
Gibbs free, 67, 111, 118

internal, 112, 239, 243
kinetic, 75
potential, 37
thermal, 36, 47, 92
viscous dissipation, 251, 264,
337, 346
Engineering plastics, 362
Engineering tensile stress, 246
Enthalpy, 97–99, 111–113, 117–118, 345
Entropy, 69, 97–98, 110, 116, 119, 240–242, 286
elasticity, 241–242, 286
Epoxies, 25, 28, 344, 352, 363
plasticizers, 124
Equations
Arrhenius, 155
Carothers’, 134
Carreau, 258
Einstein, 120
Huggins, 71
Mark-Houwink-Sakurada, 72
Modified Cross, 258
Rayleigh, 212
Williams-Landel-Ferry, 260, 326
Esterification reaction, 13
Esters, 6, 13
cellulose, 38, 362
Ethylene, 17, 24, 196, 223, 224
Ethylene glycol, 22, 24, 67, 141, 143
Extended-chain crystals, 56–57
Extending oils, 377, 378
External lubricants, 368–369, 371
External plasticizer, 122
Extrusion, 344–346
Extrusion, blow, 345–346
Extrusion blow molding, 347, 348,
Fiberglass reinforced plastics, 23, 352–353, 363
Fibers, 1, 380
spinning, 353–355
synthetic, 380–382
dyeing, 381
heat effects, 122, 381–382
moisture effect, 122, 381–382
processing, 380–381. See also names of fibers
Filament winding, 353
Fillers, 52, 364, 366, 367, 371, 372, 373,
376–377
First-order thermodynamic transition, 93
Flame retardants, 371
Flory-Huggins interaction parameter, 117–118
Flory-Huggins theory, 117–118
Flory temperature, 119

INDEX

Flow
Couette, 311–314, 330–331
Elongational, 270
Poisueille, 265–268
tube, 265–269
turbulent, 268–269
viscometric, 251–252, 265, 308, 311–313,
315
viscous, 250–255
basic definitions, 251–252
curves, 252–255
influence of molecular weight, 262–263
polymer melts, 253, 255–256
polymer solutions, 253, 255–256
pressure effects, 263–264
quantitative representation of behavior,
256–259
temperature dependence, 259–262
time-dependent behavior, 254–255
Flow curves, 252–259
Flow index, 256
Fluidized-bed coating, 349, 385, 388
Fluids
dilatant, 253, 257
Maxwell element as, 279
Newtonian, 256, 262, 268–269, 277
pseudoplastic, 253, 256, 257
rheopectic, 254
thixotropic, 254
Folded-chain crystallites, 55
Formica , 24, 27, 393
Four-parameter model, 258, 273, 277, 285–288,
305–307, 322, 341
Free-radical addition polymerization, 146–180
average chain lengths, 153–155, 158, 166–169
chain transfer, 157–160
distribution of chain lengths, 160–165
gelation in, 148–149
kinetics of, 148–153
mechanism of, 147–148
Free-radical initiators, 146–147, 149, 166,
351, 369
Free volume, 95
Freezing-point depression, 67
Fringed-micelle model, 53–54
Functionality, 13, 15, 18, 23, 137
Gate, 274, 339, 340, 341
Gaussian distribution, 247
Gegen ion, 186, 187
Gel, 79, 109, 167, 376
Gel coat, 352

399

Gel effect, 220
Gel permeation chromatography, 66, 79–85
Gel point, 137–141
Gibbs free energy, 67, 98, 110
Glass capillary viscometers, 74, 264, 311
Glass transition, 91–92
Glass transition temperature, 91–97, 109, 242,
260, 322, 324, 325, 361, 368, 375,
376, 384
Glassy modulus, 322–323, 327
Glue, super, 393
Glue, white, 233, 392
Glue, surgical, 393
Glycerin, 15, 32, 138, 140, 144, 384
Glycol, 22, 24, 25, 30, 134, 142
Glyptal, 24
Graft copolymers, 21, 22, 202–203, 207, 364,
367
Grafted polymer surfaces, 202–203
Group-transfer polymerization, 194–195
Gutta-percha, 42
Hand layup, 352
Heat effect on fibers, 122, 381–382
Heat of vaporization, 67
Heterogeneous stereospecific polymerization,
196–202, 227
Hexamethylenetetramine, 369
Homopolymers, 20–21, 40, 50, 52, 97, 101, 123,
189, 207
Hopper, 337, 339–340, 344, 373
Hot-runner molds, 340
Huggins equation, 71
Hydrocarbon oils, 377
Hydrogen bonding, 35–40, 47, 54, 99, 113,
121, 380
Hydrosol, 124
Hydroxy acid, 16, 18, 134
Ideal copolymerization, 210
Ideal rubber, 242–244, 325
statistics, 246–248
Ideal solutions, 67, 119, 210
Impact modifiers, 364
Impact strength, 225, 367
Infrared measurements, 67, 80
Inherent viscosity, 71–72
Inhibitors, 141, 153–154, 157–159
Initiators, 23, 67, 146–148, 149–154, 157,
166–167, 174–176, 179, 186–187,
191, 193, 195, 209, 222, 230, 352,
369, 372

400

INDEX

Injection blow molding, 338, 347–348
Injection molding, 105, 264, 337–344
Instantaneous chain length, 153–155,
169–174, 209
Instantaneous copolymer composition, 209
Interatomic distances, 36–37
Internal energy, 112, 114, 241, 248
Internal lubricant, 369
Internal plasticizer, 123
Intrinsic viscosity, 70–75, 83, 118, 262
Ion-exchange resins, 230
Ionic bonding, 35–37
Ionic polymerizations, 185–193
Ions, counter or gegen, 186, 187
Isobutylene, 186
Isocyanate, 6, 15, 342
Isotactic polypropylene, 41, 381
Isotactic structures, 41–42
Isotropic compression, 240, 249
Isotropic pressure, 241, 242
Kevlar, 57–58, 355, 363
Kinematic viscosity, 75
Kinetic chain length, 154, 165
Kinetic energy, 75
Lacquers. 227, 383–384
Lactam, 16
Lactic acid, 18
Lamellae, 54–56, 57
Latex, 30, 105, 178–179, 232–233,
384–385, 392
Latex adhesives, 392
Latex paints, 30, 384–385
Leathery region, 327
Lexan , 20, 25, 28
Light scattering, 66, 69–70
Limiting viscosity number, 72
Linear polyethylene, 57, 93,
196, 348
Linear polymer chain, 20
Linear polymers, 20–21, 28–29
as thermoplastic, 37
Linear viscoelasticity, 276–304
Boltzmann superposition principle, 293–296,
301
Deborah number, 270, 288, 306, 323–324
dynamic mechanical testing, 297–304,
316–323
four-parameter model, 289, 305–307,
322, 341
limit of, 279

mechanical models, 276–284
quantitative approaches, 293–297
time-temperature superposition, 323–329
Liquid-crystal polymers, 57–59, 111
lyotropic, 57, 111
thermotropic, 57–59
Liquid-liquid transition, 104
Lithography, 358
Living polymers, 187–189, 191, 195, 202
Logarithmic viscosity number, 72
Loss tangent, 300
Lost-core molding, 342
Lower critical solution temperature,
110, 121
Lower-Newtonian, viscosity, 74, 255
Low-shrink additive, 372–373
Lubricants, 363, 368–369, 372
Lucite , 91, 102
Macromolecular hypothesis, 3
Makrolon , 25, 28
Maleic acid, 22–23
Maleic anhydride, 22–23, 210–211, 217
Maltese Cross appearance, 55
Mandrel, 346
Mass polymerization, 220
Master batching, 232–233
Maxwell element, 279–282, 289, 294–295, 296,
301, 303
Maxwell orthogonal rheometer, 319
Maxwell relation, 244
Mechanical models for linear viscoelastic
response, 276–285
Melmac , 24, 27
Melt fracture, 345
Melting, thermodynamics of, 97–100
Melting point, crystalline, 50, 58, 91, 93,
97–100, 361
Melt spinning, 353
Membrane osmometry, 68–69
Memory function, 294, 301
Mercaptans, 158–159
Metastable amorphous state, 100
2-Methyl-1,3 butadiene, 19
Methyl methacrylate, 31, 45, 64, 194,
220, 231
a-Methyl styrene, 96, 186
Micelles, 21, 174–178, 387
critical concentration, 174
fringed model, 53–54
Microencapsulation, 387–388
Modified Cross model, 258–260, 266

INDEX

Modulus, 50–51, 239, 247, 277–278, 281–282,
287–288, 291, 297–298, 301, 308–309,
322, 325, 361, 363, 366, 368, 377
complex, 298
glassy, 287, 322–323, 327
Hooke’s, 277, 308
loss, 298, 308
relaxation, 281, 289, 290, 292–293, 294,
301, 328
rubbery, 322, 327
shear, 277
storage, 297–298, 301
tensile, 50–51, 57, 362
Young’s, 247, 277, 308–309
Moisture, effect on fibers, 122, 381–382
Molding, 337–344
blow, 338, 347–348
compression, 342
fluidized-bed, 349
foam, 338
injection, 337–341, 343–344
lost-core, 342
reaction injection, 342–343
reinforced thermoset, 352–353
resin-transfer, 343–344
rotational, 338, 348–349
slush, 348–349
transfer, 342
Molecular motions in an amorphous
polymer, 92
Molecular response, 97, 285–288
Molecular structure, 1, 3–4, 11, 19, 35–44
Molecular weight, 61–85
average, 62–75
defined, 62–65
determination of, 66–75, 79–85
number, 61–62, 75–76
viscosity, 72–73
weight, 62–63, 69
defined, 61
distributions, 75–79, 202
influence on flow properties, 262–263
Monodisperse polymers, 63–64, 72, 80–82,
189–194
Monomers, 5, 12, 15–16, 20–21, 24
difunctional, 15, 20
vinyl, 17–18
Most-probable distribution, 133, 161, 190, 201
Motionless mixers, 343
Multiviscosity motor oils, 120
Mylar, 24, 26, 100
Natta, G., 41–42, 196

401

Natural rubber, 12, 19, 22, 42, 243, 245, 376,
378–379
Network chains, 246–247
Network polymers, 37, 148
Newtonian fluids, 253–254, 256, 262,
268–270, 277
Newtonian viscosity, 74, 291
Non radical addition polymerization, 185–202
anionic, 186–194
cationic, 185–186
group transfer, 194
heterogeneous stereospecific, 196–202
Nozzle, 342, 357
Number-average chain lengths, 133–136,
155–156, 168, 169, 189, 209, 213
Number-average molecular weight, 63–64, 66,
67, 69, 246
Nylons, 2, 5, 14, 16, 20, 21, 24, 26, 57–58, 98,
102, 134, 228–229, 362, 381
Oil paints, 383–384
Oils
drying, 144, 384
extending, 248, 377, 378
motor, 120, 123
polyunsaturated vegetable, 124
Oil varnish, 384
Olefins, 50, 196, 225–226
Oligomers, 12, 61, 123, 133, 202, 385–386
Optical properties, 51–53, 100, 224
Organic functional groups, 14
Organosol, 124
Orientation blow molding, 347
Orion , 354
Orthogonal rheometer, 319–320
Osmometers, 68–69
Osmometry
membrane, 68–69
vapor-pressure, 69
Osmotic pressure, 67–68
Ostwald viscometers, 74
Oxidative coupling, 28
Oxirane rings, 124
Paints, 383–387
latex, 30, 384–385
oil, 384
Parison, 338, 347–348
Parison programmers, 347
Penultimate effects, 216–217
Persulfate, 146, 174
Phase angle, 297

402

INDEX

Phenolics, 12, 366, 369, 393
Phenoxy, 25, 28
Phillips catalysts, 196
Photoinitiators, 146–147, 358, 386
Phthalic anhydride, 23, 24, 140–141
Pigments, 115, 124, 351, 355, 363, 368, 369,
378, 381, 383
Plasticizers, 102, 103, 122–124, 363, 368
efficiency, 123
epoxy, 124
external, 122–123
internal, 123
permanence, 123
polymeric, 123
Plastics, 1–2, 361–373
contents of compounds, 363–370
mechanical properties, 362–363
rubber toughened, 364
Platens, 342
Plexiglas , 91, 102
Plywood, 393
Poisson distribution, 190
Poisueille flow, 265–267, 308
Polyacrylonitrile, 17, 38, 95, 223, 364, 380
Polyamides, 14, 16, 99, 392
Polybutadiene, 52, 91, 364, 367, 376
Poly (butylene terephthalate), 24, 99
Polycarbonates, 24, 363, 365
Polychlorotrifluoroethylene, 103
Polycondensation, 14, 131–142
gel formation, 137–142
interfacial, 228–229
kinetics of, 142–143
statistics of, 132–133
Poly (diallyl phthalate), 24, 27
Polydispersity index, 63, 65, 80, 82, 86, 91, 137,
170, 172, 190, 201–202
Polyesters, 2, 5, 14–16, 20, 23, 58, 66, 140, 143,
352, 355, 363, 372, 386
unsaturated, 22–23, 140–141, 344, 351, 355,
367, 369, 372
Polyethyl acrylate, 91
Polyethylene, 11, 24, 26, 40, 41, 49, 50,
51, 93, 97, 99–100, 102–103, 108,
158, 196, 223–226, 228, 256, 348,
372, 373, 391
density of, 49–50
high, 49–50, 225
low, 49–50, 99, 223
medium, 50
ultra-low, 50
very-low, 50

linear, 24, 26, 40, 57, 93, 196, 348
linear low density, 50, 225
properties of, 49–50
Poly (ethylene terephthalate) 24, 26, 100, 373
Polyimide, 14–15, 25, 29, 96
Polyisoprene, 42–43, 91, 376
1,2-Polyisoprene, 43
1,4-Polyisoprene, 42–43, 376
cis, 42–43
trans, 42–43
3,4-Polyisoprene, 43
Polymeric plasticizers, 123
Polymerization, 12–18, 131–234
anionic, 186–192
bulk, 220–225
cationic, 185–186
chain growth, 146–180
condensation, 12–14, 131–143
degree of, 14
emulsion, 173–180, 232–234
kinetics of, 176–180
free-radical addition, 146–180
average chain lengths, 155–156, 159–173,
179, 186, 189–190
chain transfer, 157–160
kinetics of homogeneous, 149–153
mechanism of, 146–148
gas-phase olefin, 225–226
group-transfer, 194–195
heterogeneous bulk, 220
heterogeneous stereospecific, 196–202
interfacial, 228
ionic, 227
mass, 220–225
oxidative coupling, 28
precipitation, 223
ring scission, 16, 28, 42
solution, 226–228
step-growth, 131–143
suspension, 229–232
vinyl, 17–18
Ziegler-Natta, 227–234
Polymers, 1–6
addition, 14, 17
amorphous, 47–48, 91, 322, 327
molecular motions in, 92
branched, 19, 21–22, 37, 50, 103, 137
condensation, 13–17, 131
crosslinked, 19, 22, 37, 38, 53, 79, 113, 137,
140, 149, 224, 239, 284, 290, 328, 352,
361, 369, 370, 375, 386
crystalline, 47–59, 93–104

INDEX

diene, 6, 18–19, 42–44, 196, 376
linear, 15, 18, 20–21, 46, 80, 134, 282
living, 187–189, 195, 202,
monodisperse, 63, 72, 80, 81, 189, 194
network, 22, 37, 148
stereoregular, 41, 47, 49, 194
structure of, 19–30
thermoplastic, 11–12, 37–38, 58, 222,
337–339, 342–344, 350, 356, 363,
369–370, 375
thermosetting, 12, 37–38, 137, 227, 327, 342,
351, 352, 355, 362, 369–370, 373, 385
types of, 11–30
unsaturated, 18, 23, 377–378
Polymethyl methacrylate, 31, 49, 71, 75, 91, 194,
220, 222, 231, 322–323, 353, 362
Poly (4-methyl-1-pentene), 50, 52
Polyphenylene oxide, 25, 117
Polypropylene, 5, 11, 25, 41, 50–53, 75, 196,
225, 228, 346, 363, 366, 381
Polystyrene, 11, 20, 26, 41, 52, 75, 80–83, 96,
108, 191, 230–231, 328, 340, 362–365,
367, 369, 373, 376
Polysulfone, 25
Polytetrafluorethylene, 25, 38, 391
Polyureas, 31, 99, 342, 372
Polyurethane, 15, 25, 99, 338, 342–344, 372,
385, 393
Polyvinyl chloride, 11, 17, 20, 75, 123, 223, 231,
367, 368, 371, 375
Polyvinylidene chloride, 103
Potential energy, 36, 37, 95–96, 250, 288
Potting, 222
Power law, 256–258, 266–269, 315–316
Preform, 343, 347
Pressure
hydrostatic, 241
isotropic, 241–242
osmotic, 66–69
Tg and, 95
viscosity and, 263–264
Pressure-sensitive adhesives, 392
Primary covalent bonding, 35–38
Procedure X, 292
Processing, 337–359
calendering, 338, 349–350
casting, 338, 351–352
solution, 351
extrusion, 58, 338, 344–346, 354
fiber spinning, 57, 338, 353–355, 381
molding, 337–344
blow, 338, 347–348

403

compression, 342
fluidized-bed, 348–349
injection, 337–341, 342
lost-core, 342
reaction injection, 342
reinforced thermoset, 352–353
resin transfer, 343
rotational, 348
slush, 348
transfer, 342
sheet forming, 350
stamping, 351
thermoforming, 350–351
Processing aids, 363, 369, 378
Promoters, 378
Propagation, 148–150, 157–158, 160, 162, 176,
186–187, 192, 194, 196–199, 208, 216
Propylene, 17, 25, 53, 225
Propylene oxide, 42
Protective coatings, 3
Protective colloids, 230
Prototyping, 358
Pseudoplastic fluids, 253, 256–257, 272
Pseudoplasticity, 267
Pultrusion, 353
Pyramidal polymer crystals, 54
Radiation curing, 386
Radioactively tagged initiators, 67
Random copolymers, 20, 53, 97, 101–102,
207, 212
Rate of strain, 281–283, 288, 297, 309
Rayleigh equation, 212
Reaction injection molding, 338, 342
Reactive adhesives, 393
Reactivity ratios, 208–209, 217
Reactors continuously stirred tank, 171, 193,
215, 220, 223, 233
batch, 134, 152, 167, 169–173, 190, 192, 210,
213, 232
plug-flow, 171, 193, 215, 224
semi-batch, 215, 220
tubular, 171, 193, 224
Recycling, 2, 104, 121, 373
Redox systems, 146, 175
Reduced viscosity, 70–72
Reference temperature, 94, 260, 325
Refractive index, 52, 69, 80
Refractometers, 80
Regrind, 339–340
Reinforced thermoset molding, 338,
352–353

404

INDEX

Reinforcing agents, 222, 363–364, 366, 367,
369, 376, 377
Relative viscosity, 70–72
Relaxation
modulus, 281, 289, 292, 293
stress, 276, 281–282, 284, 289, 292, 293,
295–297, 301, 303–304, 324–325,
327–328
time, 281, 288, 290, 325
Repeating unit, 14, 16, 20–23, 43, 58, 63, 101,
103, 148
Resins, 12, 100, 124, 141, 338, 343, 344, 348,
350, 372, 393
ion-exchange, 230
Resin-transfer molding, 343
Resoles, 369
Retardation times, 290
Retarders, 153–154
Retention volume, 80
Reynolds number, 268–270
Rheology, 250–271
Rheopectic fluids, 254–255
Ring-scission polymerization, 16, 28, 42
Rotational molding, 338, 348–349
Rubber Reserve Program, 232
Rubbers, 1, 3, 12, 19, 20, 22, 25, 38, 42, 43, 52,
91, 107, 173, 187, 225, 227–228, 232,
233, 239, 242–244, 246–247, 287, 301,
318, 351, 364, 375–379
antioxidants, 378
contents of compounds, 376–378
curing systems, 377–378
elasticity, 239–248
statistics, 246–248
thermodynamics. 239–246
extending oils, 248, 377
fillers, 376–377
ideal, 242–243, 244, 246–248
statistics, 246–248
natural, 12, 19, 22, 42, 243, 245, 376, 378, 379
pigments, 376, 378
reinforcing fillers, 376
silicone, 3, 25, 95, 250, 351, 371, 376
stabilizers, 378
styrene-butadiene, 20, 232, 367,
385, 392
thermoplastic elastomers, 375–376
vulcanizing systems, 377–378
Rubber-toughened plastics, 364
Rubbery modulus, 287, 322, 327
Rubbery plateau, 309, 322, 327
Runners, 339, 340, 342

Salts
alkali metal, 186
ionic, 67
organic acid, 173
Saran , 103
Secondary bonds, 35, 37–38, 40, 53, 122, 367,
381, 391, 393
Second-order thermodynamic
transition, 93
Semi-permeable membranes, 68–69
Shear rate, 74, 120, 251–259, 261–264, 266, 304,
314, 356
Shear strain, 240, 251–252, 277–282, 284, 295,
302
Shear stress, 240–241, 247, 251–254, 256,
259–261, 264–266, 277–282, 284,
287, 291, 293, 301, 313, 321
Shear-thickening, 253
Shear-thinning, 253
Shear viscosity, 255, 258–263, 270, 277
Sheet forming, 350–351
Sheet molding compound (SMC), 351,
371–373
Silane coupling agents, 367
Silicone rubbers, 25, 351, 371, 376
Silly putty, 3, 250, 270, 288
Sirup, 222
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC), 79–83
Slip agent, 371
Slush molding, 348–349
Soap, 174–175, 232, 367
Solubility, 107–124
crosslinking and, 108
general rules for, 107–108
parameters, 95, 112–114
three dimensional, 114–115
thermodynamic basis of, 110–111
Solution casting, 338, 351
Solution polymerization, 226–228
Solutions, 48, 54, 57, 67, 70, 73–75, 107–124,
140, 192, 210, 221, 250–251, 253–255,
258, 262, 268, 270, 292, 308, 311, 313,
314, 349, 386
concentrated-plasticizers, 122–124
dilute, properties of, 48, 57, 69–71, 75, 80,
109–110, 118–121
flow properties, 255–256
Solution viscosity, 70–72, 74, 120,
262, 269
Solvent-based adhesives, 391–392
Solventless coatings, 385–387
Solvent power, 119–120

INDEX

Solvents
action of, 38
polymer-polymer-common solvent
system, 121
Specific viscosity, 70, 72
Specific volume, 92–93, 100, 101
Spherulites, 55–56
Spinnerettes, 274, 369
Spinning
dry, 353–354
fiber, 338, 353–358
melt, 353
wet, 57, 354–355
Spirit varnish, 384
Stabilizers, 367–368, 378
Standard linear solid, 306
Staple, 380
Statistical copolymers, 20
Staudinger, Dr. Herman, 3
Step-growth polymerizations, 131–143
Stereoisomerism, 40–44
in diene polymers, 42–44
in vinyl polymers, 40–42
Stereoisomers, 41, 43–44
Stereoregular polymers, 41, 47, 185, 194
Stereoregular polypropylenes, 50
Stereospecific polymerization, 196–202
Storage modulus, 297–298, 301, 308
Strain, 240, 247, 252, 276–284, 287, 288,
293–295, 297, 300, 302, 309–310,
317–322, 324, 341
rate of, 252, 281–283, 288, 297, 310
shear, 277–278, 280, 282, 284, 295
tensile, 247, 277–278, 280, 282–284, 318
Stress, 239–240, 251–254, 256, 260–261,
264–266, 277–287, 313
shear, 240, 251–254, 256, 261, 264–266, 277–
282, 284, 313
tensile, 240, 242–243, 246, 277–282,
284–285, 287, 291, 293, 324
engineering, 246, 276
true, 247
ultimate, 308, 311
yield, 308, 311
Stress cracking, 342, 348–349, 370
Stress relaxation, 276, 281–282, 284, 290, 292,
295, 303–304, 324–325, 327–328
Stretch blow molding, 348
Structural unit, 132, 244
Styrene, 17, 20, 22–23, 41, 52, 96, 111, 117, 180,
186, 189, 195, 211, 214, 217, 223, 367,
369, 378

405

Styrene-Butadiene Rubber, 20, 232, 376, 392
Super glue, 393
Surface finishes, 3, 341, 361, 369, 383–387
enamel, 384
lacquers, 227, 383–384
latex paints, 384–385
oil paints, 383–384
solventless, 385–387
varnish, 384
Suspension polymerization, 229–232
Syndiotactic polypropylene, 41
Syndiotactic structures, 41–42
Synthesis, chemistry of, 12–19
Synthetic fibers, 380–382
dyeing, 381
heat effects, 381–382
moisture effects, 381–382
processing, 380–381
spinning, 353–355
Tangent, loss, 300
Temperature
bonding response, 37–38
and chain length, 155–156
at constant force, 243–244
at constant length, 244–245
Flory, 119
flow properties dependence, 259–262
glass transition, 91–97, 109, 242, 260, 322,
324–325, 361, 368, 375–376, 384
lower critical solution, 110, 121
and rate of polymerization, 155–156
reaction to, 11–12
reference, 94, 260, 325–326
shift factor, 325–326
time superposition, 292–297, 308,
323–325, 328
upper critical solution, 109–111
Tenacity, 380
Tensile stress, 240, 242–243, 246, 277–282, 284,
285, 287, 291, 293, 324
engineering, 246, 276
true, 247
Termination, 148, 150, 153–155, 163–165, 176,
179–180, 186–187, 195, 216, 221
Thermal degradation, 103
Thermal energy, 36, 47, 95, 120, 242, 256,
260, 324
Thermodynamics
of elasticity, 239–245
of melting, 97–100
of solubility, 110–118

406

INDEX

Thermodynamic transition
first-order, 93
second-order, 93
Thermoplastic elastomers, 375–379
Thermoplastic polymers, 11, 12, 37–38, 58,
337–339, 342
Thermosetting polymers, 12, 30, 37, 38,
137, 351
Theta condition, 119
solvent, 119
temperature, 119
Thixotropic fluids, 254–255
Thixotropy, 385
Three-parameter model, 258, 284
Time-dependent behavior, 254–255
Times
characteristic, 258, 288, 324
relaxation, 270, 281, 288–290, 325
retardation, 290
temperature superposition, 292–297,
308, 323–325
Titanate coupling agents, 367
Titanium tetrachloride, 196
Titration, 66
Torsional flow, 315–317
Transfer molding, 342
Transient time-dependent effects,
254–255
Transitions, 91–104
alpha, 104
beta, 104
first-order, 93
glass, 91–97, 101–103
liquid-liquid, 103
melting, 93–94, 97–100
second-order, 93
Tricresyl phosphate, 123
Tromsdorff effect, 155, 220, 234
Trouton’s viscosity, 277
True tensile stress, 247
Tube flow, 250–271
Turbulent flow, 268–270
Two-roll mills, 356–357, 379
Ubbelohde viscometers, 74–75
Ultraviolet curing, 386
Unsaturated polyesters, 22, 23, 140, 344, 351,
355, 367, 369, 372
Unsaturated polymers, 18
Unsaturation, degree of, 23
Upper critical solution temperature,
109–111

Valve gate, 340
Van der Waals bonding, 35–37, 114
Vaporization, 91, 112
heat of, 67
Vaporization temperatures, 112
Vapor-pressure osmometry, 69
Varnish, 383–384
Vectra A , 58
Velocity, average, 267
Velocity gradient, 251–252, 265–266, 312
Vinyl monomers, 17–20, 23, 41, 50, 153, 221,
369, 370
Vinyl polymerization, 17–18
Vinyl polymers, stereoisomerism in, 40–42
Viscoelastic solids, 284, 290
Viscoelasticity, linear, 276–304
Boltzmann Superposition, 293–297, 301
Deborah number, 270, 288–289, 323–324
dynamic mechanical testing, 297–304,
316–323
four-parameter model, 258, 277, 285–288,
322, 341
limit of, 279
mechanical models, 276–285
molecular response, 285–288
procedure X, 292
quantitative approaches, 289–293
time-temperature superposition, 292–297,
308, 323–325
Viscoelastic response, 250, 276–288
Viscometers
capillary, 74, 264, 311
cone-and-plate, 313–314
Couette, 311–313
disk-plate, 314–316
glass capillary, 74
Ostwald, 74
Ubbelohde, 74–75
Viscometric flows, 251–252, 265, 308,
311–313, 315
Viscometry, 66, 120, 264, 311–312, 316, 318
Viscosity, 66, 70–75, 85, 118, 120–121, 123,
167, 221, 223, 226, 230, 233, 250–260,
262–264, 268–271, 277–278, 291–292,
298, 303–304, 311–316, 341, 343–344,
363, 367, 369, 383–387, 391
average molecular weight, 66, 252
complex, 298
inherent, 71–72
intrinsic, 70–75, 83
kinematic, 75
limiting number, 72

INDEX

logarithmic number, 72
lower-Newtonian, 74, 255–256
multi-, 120, 123
Newtonian, 291
pressure and, 263–264
reduced, 70–72
relative, 70, 72
specific, 70, 72
tensile, 305
terminology, 72
Trouton’s, 277
upper Newtonian, 256, 258
zero-shear, 74, 255, 258–260, 263–264,
292, 303
Viscosity number, 72
Viscosity ratio, 72
Viscous energy dissipation, 251, 256, 264–265,
301, 339, 345–346
Viscous flow, 250–271
basic definitions, 250–252
curves, 252–254
influence of molecular weight,
262–263
polymer melts, 250–251, 253, 255–256
polymer solutions, 255–256
pressure effects, 263–264
quantitative representation of behavior,
256–259
region, 325, 327
temperature dependence, 259–262
time-dependent behavior, 254–255
Voigt-Kelvin model, 283–285, 288, 290–291

407

Volume
elution, 80–81, 83
free, 95, 97
molar, 112–114, 118
specific, 92–93, 100, 101
Vulcanization, 12, 22, 239, 376–378
Vulcanizing systems, 377–378
Weight, molecular, 61–86
average, 62–75
defined, 61
distributions, 75–79, 85, 202
number-average, 62–68, 246
viscosity-average, 72–73
viscous flow influence, 262–263
weight-average, 63–64
Weissenberg effect, 3, 287
Wet spinning, 57, 354
White glue, 233, 392
Williams-Landel-Ferry equation, 260, 326
X-ray studies, 48, 55
Xydar, 58, 99
Young’s modulus, 247, 277, 308–309
Zero-shear viscosity, 74, 255, 258–260,
263–264, 292, 303
Ziegler-Natta catalysis, 185, 196–197, 199, 202,
214, 225, 228, 232, 234
Zimm plot, 69
Zinc oxide, 378

