Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Materials Today Bio
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/materials-today-bio

Graphene-based wearable biosensors for point-of-care diagnostics: From
surface functionalization to biomarker detection
Jiawen Song a,1, Yang Luo b,1 , Zhuang Hao a,*, Menglong Qu a , Cong Huang c,** , Ziran Wang d ,
Jun Yang e, Qingrou Liang e, Yuan Jia e,*** , Qiuming Song e,****, Qiuting Zhang a , Sida Luo a
a

School of Mechanical Engineering & Automation, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, 110016, China
State Key Laboratory of Robotics and Systems, School of Mechatronics Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 150001, China
d
Key Laboratory of High-efficiency and Clean Mechanical Manufacture of MOE, School of Mechanical Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, 250061, China
e
Sino-German College of Intelligent Manufacturing, Shenzhen Technology University, Shenzhen, 518118, China
b
c

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Graphene
Surface functionalization
Graphene field-effect transistor
Electrochemical sensor
Biomarkers
Integration and application

The growing demand for non-invasive, real-time health monitoring has driven the development of graphenebased wearable biosensors for point-of-care (POC) diagnostics. This review explores the surface functionaliza­
tion of graphene and its critical role in enhancing the performance of wearable biosensors for biomarker
detection. Leveraging graphene’s exceptional electrical, mechanical, and biocompatible properties, we discuss
how surface functionalization—such as covalent and non-covalent functionalization, biomolecular probes, and
passivation layers—enable highly sensitive and selective detection of biomarkers in biofluids. We categorize
biomarkers based on their physical properties and explore various wearable designs, including patches, contact
lenses, microneedles, and textiles, highlighting their integration into POC devices. Furthermore, we examine the
challenges and opportunities in translating graphene-based sensors from the lab to real-world applications,
emphasizing the importance of biocompatibility and surface functionalization for improved performance. By
bridging the gap between material science and biomedical engineering, this review provides a roadmap for the
development of next-generation graphene biosensors that could revolutionize personalized medicine and pointof-care diagnostics.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of society, the fast-paced daily life and
enormous work pressure have led to an increase in people’s health
problems. Diseases related to unhealthy lifestyles are becoming
increasingly common among people of all ages, and the occurrence of
major diseases such as cancer is also becoming more frequent [1,2]. The
public’s awareness of sub-health hazards and attention to their daily
health status are gradually increasing. More and more people are also
choosing to undergo regular physical examinations at hospitals. Espe­
cially for some chronic disease patients who experience physical

discomfort, they will choose to seek medical attention immediately.
However, the tedious examination process and long waiting times for
test results hinder the timely prediction of some chronic disease emer­
gencies. In addition, some patients may experience fainting or anxiety
during the blood draw process, which not only reduces the reliability of
the test samples, but also exacerbates patients’ fear of such procedures.
Given this dilemma, the emergence of non-invasive point of care (POC)
testing may pave a new way to address this issue [3]. It is of great sig­
nificance to use wearable sensors to non-invasively detect biomarkers
that can be used as indicators of health status assessment, so that pa­
tients can understand their health status anytime and anywhere, and

This article is part of a special issue entitled: Surface & Interface published in Materials Today Bio.
* Corresponding authors.
** Corresponding author.
*** Corresponding authors.
**** Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: zhuanghao@buaa.edu.cn (Z. Hao), huangc@hit.edu.cn (C. Huang), jiayuan@sztu.edu.cn (Y. Jia), songqiuming@sztu.edu.cn (Q. Song).
1
Jiawen Song and Yang Luo contributed equally to this work.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2025.101667
Received 19 January 2025; Received in revised form 5 March 2025; Accepted 13 March 2025
Available online 14 March 2025
2590-0064/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync/4.0/).

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

J. Song et al.

even predict the occurrence of certain major diseases. For example,
detecting inflammatory markers related to nutritional metabolism can
help assess the body’s inflammation and nutritional status, thereby
aiding in adjusting dietary structure and irregular lifestyle to support
health management [4–6].
Therefore, the development of wearable sensors based on nano­
materials has gained profound interest in the recent decades. Nano­
materials serve as highly sensitive analytical probes in the realm of
single-molecule detection, due to their exceptional physical and chem­
ical properties, high adsorption and reactivity, and large surface-tovolume ratio, which are not present in bulk materials [7,8]. Among
the diverse nanomaterials categorized by their dimensionality (0D, 1D,
2D, and 3D), two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials have garnered sig­
nificant attention in the biosensor domain. The most widely studied 2D
materials include graphene [9], transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD)
[10], black phosphorus (BP) [11] and MXenes [12]. Moreover, while
carbon nanotube [13] are fundamentally one-dimensional materials,
their exceptional structure and properties grant them significant po­
tential in applications associated with two-dimensional materials. Each
of these materials possess unique properties that make them suitable for
various sensing applications. The properties of each material are listed
in Table 1. It is noteworthy to mention here that graphene exhibits
extraordinary electrical properties and mechanical strength, making it
an ideal candidate for wearable sensors that demand high sensitivity and
durability under mechanical strain.
Graphene is a zero-bandgap semiconductor material composed of
carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb structure, with sp2 hybridized
orbitals forming a six-membered ring [29]. It possesses good properties,
which are helpful for sensitive sensor detection, such as (1) Electrical
properties: Carbon atoms form planar covalent bonds through sp2 hy­
bridization, facilitating the unrestricted movement of electrons across a
two-dimensional lattice with minimal scattering, thereby endowing
graphene with exceptionally high electron mobility [30,31]. The hon­
eycomb structure of graphene provides a continuous conjugated
π-electron system, enabling electrons to move freely throughout the
material, thereby offering graphene high conductivity [32]. Schedin. F,
and colleagues [33] developed micron-sized sensors based on graphe­
ne’s high electron mobility that can detect gas molecules adhering to or
detaching from the graphene surface. (2) Mechanical flexibility: Gra­
phene owes a Young’s modulus (E) of 1.0 TPa and an exceptional tensile
strength of 130 GPa, allowing it to endure substantial external forces
without undergoing plastic deformation [34,35]. (3) Surface function­
alization: Due to its high specific surface area and abundant chemical
active sites, graphene’s surface can interact with a variety of functional
groups and molecules [36]. This unique characteristic allows surface
functionalization via chemical or physical methods, enabling the mod­
ulation of its electrical, chemical, mechanical, and biocompatible
properties for use in medical environments to detect various biomarkers
[37]. Thanks to this convenient condition, Pratima Labroo and col­
leagues [38] designed flexible sensors with surface-modified graphene
that effectively detected lactate. (4) Economically, since Professor Andre
Geim’s [39] groundbreaking achievement of isolating monolayer gra­
phene from graphite in 2004, this scientific milestone has spurred a
series of technological innovations. With the advent of new technologies
enabling large-scale production of graphene, commercialization has
become more feasible, and the preparation of graphene-based materials

has become more convenient [40]. As a result, the outstanding electrical
properties, mechanical flexibility, surface functionalization ability, and
economic viability of graphene have made it a material of great interest
to scientists [41].
Leveraging graphene’s exceptional electrical characteristics such as
ultra-high carrier mobility, the sensitivity, low-frequency noise, and the
resolution of graphene-based wearable sensors are improved. Moreover,
graphene’s ultra-thin thickness aids in rapid responses to external
changes, improving the responsiveness of wearable biosensors, thereby
enabling them to detect biomarkers from various sources instantly and
effectively [4,42].
In this review article, we comprehensively summarize the latest
developments and cutting-edge technologies of graphene based wear­
able biosensors. Firstly, this article explores the influence of surface
functionalization on the electrical properties and biocompatibility of
graphene, and elaborates on the role of graphene in field-effect tran­
sistors and electrochemical detection. Then, we categorize common
biomarkers in the human body into five types based on their physical
properties: 1) cytokines and other immune proteins, 2) glucose, 3)
metabolic molecules, 4) hormones, 5) others, in order to better under­
stand the types of biomarkers and how graphene wearable biosensors
can be used to detect them. In addition, We also discuss the wearable
design forms of wearable graphene biosensors (WGB) for different body
fluids or excreta samples, covering various components, graphene
integration modes, and the necessity of achieving real-time, efficient,
and durable wearable biosensing applications, along with the execution
mechanism that promptly delivers medication upon detecting diseaseinduced biomarker abnormalities. At the conclusion of this paper, we
present an outlook on the future and development of graphene-based
wearable biomedical sensors. Finally, this review does not aim to pro­
vide an exhaustive coverage of all available literature but rather em­
phasizes the key issues, opportunities, trends, and challenges in this
field. We hope that this discussion will offer valuable guidance for future
research on the application of graphene in flexible biomedical sensing
technologies.
2. From graphene material to devices
During graphene synthesis, different methods directly impact its
defect density, morphological structure, and electrochemical activity,
which in turn influence its performance in biomarker detection. For
instance, graphene prepared via exfoliation typically exhibits high
defect density and uneven layer distribution, leading to reduced elec­
trochemical activity [43]. While chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is of
high quality with low defect density, its morphology is highly
substrate-dependent, potentially reducing interfacial charge transfer
efficiency [44]. Meanwhile, laser induced graphene (LIG) forms a
porous three-dimensional structure, which enhances specific surface
area and conductivity, yet its high defect density may compromise the
long-term stability of sensors [45].
In summary, the defects and limitations introduced by different
synthesis methods significantly hinder the application of graphene in
biosensing. To address this, surface functionalization has emerged as a
key strategy for performance enhancement. For example, polymer
coating (e.g., polyaniline) can effectively repair surface defects, thereby
improving mechanical stability and long-term durability [46]. Thus,

Table 1
The properties of each material.
Material
graphene
SWCNT
TMD(WS2)
Black phosphorus
MXene(Ti3C2Tx)

(
)
electron mobility cm2 V− 1 s− 1
4

5

10 ∼ 2.5 × 10
∼
200
1 × 105 ∼ 2.6 × 105
106

Young’s modulus (GPa)

tensile strength (GPa)

(
specific surface area m2 /g)

Ref

1000
1000
278.3 ∼ 326.5
44 ∼ 166
72.4

130
300
38.4 ∼ 55.6
4.09 ∼ 8.42
0.739

∼ 2630
1315
∼ 145.9
∼ 2630
235.6

[14,15]
[16–18]
[19–21]
[22–25]
[26–28]

2

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

surface functionalization provides a promising approach for optimizing
graphene-based biosensors, laying a solid foundation for their wide­
spread application in the field of biosensing. Then this section will focus
on methods for surface functionalization of graphene and explain how
its electronic properties and derivatives are utilized in biomarker
molecule detection.

Exponential Enrichment) [58–60]. They can recognize specific targets,
such as proteins, small molecules, and even viral particles, through their
spatial structures, showing great potential in protein and small molecule
detection [59,61,62]. Moreover, antibody probes play a crucial role in
protein detection. Antibodies, due to their high affinity and specificity
for specific antigens, are widely used in disease diagnosis, pathogen
detection, and cancer biomarker identification [63]. Unlike nucleic acid
probes, antibody probes rely on antigen-antibody interactions,
providing unparalleled advantages in detecting proteins and macro­
molecular complexes. According to the property of antibody probes,
antibody-aptamer hybrid probes integrating nucleic acid aptamers have
gained prominence in multiplex detection and advanced biological
research recently [64].
Differently, Enzyme probes refer to catalytic proteins synthesized by
organisms [65]. They can accelerate chemical reactions without being
consumed in the process. Additionally, enzyme probes show remarkable
specificity, selectively interacting with specific substrates to create
enzyme-substrate complexes [66]. This specificity enables enzyme sen­
sors to detect specific analytes, enhancing their selectivity. Apart from
nucleic acid aptamers, antibody probes, and enzyme probes, biomole­
cular probes also encompass small molecule probes, peptide probes, and
others, which are valuable for specialized applications.
But not only are the type and selection of probes crucial in influ­
encing their effectiveness in biosensor applications, the anchoring
methods used for the probes are equally important. The anchoring of
probes determines their stability, binding strength, and signal trans­
mission efficiency on the sensor surface [67]. Anchoring approaches are
typically categorized into covalent and non-covalent methods, each of­
fering distinct pros and cons suited for particular applications. In the
anchoring process of biomolecular probes, covalent anchoring forms
stable covalent bonds between probe molecules and the graphene sur­
face through chemical reactions [68]. Active sites are introduced
through functionalization, using agents like aryl diazonium salts [69] or
1-pyrenebutyric acid [70] to functionalize graphene, and immobilizing
probes with EDC/NHS reactions. Covalent anchoring offers high binding
strength and excellent stability, ideal for applications demanding
extreme stability. Nonetheless, its key drawback lies in potentially dis­
rupting graphene’s sp2 hybrid structure, impairing electronic properties,
especially in high-sensitivity GFET applications [71]. By comparison,
non-covalent anchoring is a favored approach in numerous sensors for
preserving graphene’s structure and its ease of operation. This method
stabilizes probe molecules on the graphene surface through
non-covalent interactions (e.g., π–π stacking, electrostatic interactions,
or hydrophobic interactions) without disrupting its electronic properties
[72]. Notably, 1-pyrenebutyric acid succinimidyl ester (PBASE) is
widely recognized as a prevalent non-covalent immobilization agent.
PBASE binds to graphene via π–π interactions and reacts with probe
molecule amines through succinimidyl ester groups, forming stable
connections [73]. Its simplicity and efficiency make this method suitable
for aptamer and protein immobilization, excelling in GFET sensors.
Additionally, non-covalent anchoring includes using non-specific in­
teractions between probe molecules and graphene or employing metal
nanoparticles (e.g., gold, platinum) as intermediaries for immobilization
[74]. Such methods improve the flexibility and versatility of
non-covalent immobilization approaches.

2.1. Surface functionalization
Although graphene excels as an advanced material, in practical
biosensor applications, these properties often require adjustment and
optimization through surface functionalization to meet specific de­
mands. For example, introducing specific modification materials can
enable graphene to demonstrate properties like selective catalysis [47],
biomolecular recognition [48], or environmental adaptability [49].
Therefore, surface functionalization serves as a critical bridge for gra­
phene to transition from "material properties" to "functional properties,"
meeting practical application needs. This section classifies the objectives
of surface functionalization into: 1) Biocompatibility and antibacterial
properties, 2) Enhancing biomolecular recognition specificity, and 3)
Surface passivation.
2.1.1. Biocompatibility and antibacterial properties
Grahene demonstrates immense potential in biosensor applications,
particularly in wearable devices such as microneedles and tattoo-like
sensors, necessitating the fulfillment of two critical demands: biocom­
patibility and antimicrobial properties. Graphene inherently possesses
antibacterial properties by damaging bacterial cell membranes with its
sharp edges [50,51] and boosting reactive oxygen species (ROS) [52,
53], thereby inhibiting bacterial metabolic functions. Nevertheless,
graphene’s natural antimicrobial traits may conflict with its biocom­
patibility, especially because physical damage mechanisms could impact
biological tissues. To address this conflict, surface functionalization of­
fers an effective solution. Surface functionalization can enhance gra­
phene’s biocompatibility by introducing hydrophilic functional groups
(e.g., carboxyl, hydroxyl) and biomolecules (e.g., polyethylene glycol,
chitosan) [37,54], while its antibacterial properties can be improved by
incorporating antibacterial agents (e.g., silver nanoparticles, antimi­
crobial peptides) and optimizing charge distribution [55,56]. Conse­
quently, the chemically modifiable surface of graphene allows a balance
between its natural antimicrobial properties and biocompatibility,
facilitating the optimization of its performance for practical applications
through surface property tuning.
2.1.2. Enhancing biomolecular recognition specificity
In biosensors, enhancing biomolecular recognition specificity is
crucial to ensuring high sensitivity. Although graphene has good mo­
lecular recognition capabilities, its inherent surface properties still have
certain limitations, making it challenging to precisely recognize specific
biomolecules (e.g., DNA, proteins, or antibodies). To further enhance
biomolecular recognition specificity, commonly used techniques include
the selection and anchoring of biomolecular probe types, as well as
molecular imprinting technology (MIP).
2.1.2.1. Selection and anchoring of biomolecular probes. Biomolecular
probes are molecules with high affinity and specificity for specific bio­
molecules, typically used as recognition elements to detect or capture
target molecules [57], thereby significantly enhancing the specificity
and sensitivity of biosensors. Biomolecular probes come in various
forms, including nucleic acids, proteins, peptides, and small molecules.
This article highlights some commonly utilized and widely applicable
probe types, such as nucleic acid aptamer probes, antibody probes, and
enzyme probes. Nucleic acid aptamer probes are single-stranded DNA or
RNA molecules that form specific three-dimensional structures and can
be selected using SELEX (Systematic Evolution of Ligands by

2.1.2.2. Molecular imprinting technology (MIP). Molecularly Imprinted
Polymers (MIPs) are materials with specific molecular recognition ca­
pabilities, achieved by forming specific cavities in a polymer matrix that
match the shape and chemical properties of target molecules (template
molecules) [75]. MIP preparation involves three main steps: binding
template molecules to functional monomers (via covalent, non-covalent,
or semi-covalent bonds), polymerizing with a cross-linker to form a rigid
network, and removing the templates using chemical, solvent, or elec­
trochemical methods. This process leaves behind cavities tailored for
3

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

molecular recognition. MIPs are widely applied in biosensors. For
example, in detecting the myocardial biomarker cardiac troponin T,
MIPs are prepared with template molecules removed using acetic acid,
resulting in a sensor with high sensitivity and selectivity [76]. Although
MIPs and biomolecular probes share similar goals in molecular recog­
nition, they differ significantly in recognition mechanisms, materials,
and applicable scenarios. Biomolecular probes use natural molecules
like DNA, RNA, or antibodies for highly specific target recognition,
excelling in gene diagnostics and dynamic biological environments.
MIPs, with artificially synthesized cavities, are cost-effective, adaptable,
and reliable in extreme conditions [77].

composite surface modifications as key optimization strategies.
2.2. Detection mechanisms in graphene-based electrical biosensors
Surface functionalization of graphene not only enhances its funda­
mental properties but also imparts the ability to specifically bind with
biomolecules, offering new avenues for achieving high sensitivity, high
selectivity, and rapid response in various types of biosensors detecting
biomarkers. This section will illustrate these features by discussing
electrochemical sensors and field-effect transistor sensors, and explain
the evaluation parameters for graphene-based sensors in practical
scenarios.

2.1.3. Surface passivation
Passivating the exposed graphene surface is essential for improving
sensor interference resistance, particularly in complex biological
matrices like serum or plasma. Passivation minimizes background
interference by blocking nonspecific interactions of non-target mole­
cules with the graphene surface. Depending on the mechanism and
application scenarios, blockers can be categorized into protein blockers,
polymer blockers, small molecule blockers, and dielectric materials.
Protein blockers such as bovine serum albumin (BSA) form a physical
adsorption layer on the graphene surface, filling gaps between probe
molecules and preventing binding of non-target proteins or other mol­
ecules [78]. These blockers are particularly effective when interacting
with biomolecules such as antibodies and proteins, as they efficiently
shield against nonspecific protein adsorption in biological samples.
Polymer blockers, such as polyethylene glycol (PEG), utilize their highly
hydrophilic long-chain structures to create a barrier layer on graphene
surfaces, blocking nonspecific molecules in complex samples [79]. They
are ideal for extended detection scenarios or cases with low molecular
weight interferents due to their hydrophilicity reducing sample adhe­
sion. Small molecule blockers like glycine and ethanolamine react with
active groups on the graphene surface (e.g., carboxyl) to block unbound
active sites [80]. These blockers are simple to use and suitable for ex­
periments requiring rapid passivation, especially when residual chemi­
cally active groups remain after functionalization. Both protein and
polymer blockers rely on physical adsorption, but protein blockers are
better suited for complex biological samples, whereas polymer blockers
excel in combating low molecular weight interferents. Small molecule
blockers passivate graphene from chemical and physical isolation per­
spectives; the former is ideal for quick experiments, while the latter is
more suitable for devices requiring high stability. A rational selection of
blockers can optimize sensor performance for different detection needs,
effectively reducing nonspecific interference and improving detection
sensitivity and selectivity.

2.2.1. Graphene-based three-electrode electrochemical sensors
The fundamental principle of electrochemical biosensors is redox
reactions, where one chemical species gains electrons (reduced), and
another loses electrons (oxidized) [83]. In the field of electrochemistry,
the species gaining electrons is termed the reduced state, the species
losing electrons is called the oxidized state, and the pair facilitating
electron transfer is identified as a redox couple. The equilibrium be­
tween the reduced and oxidized states is governed by the Nernst
equation:
Ecell = E0 +

RT [red]
ln
zF
[ox]

(1)

Here, R represents the universal gas constant, F stands for the Faraday
constant, T denotes the temperature, z refers to the number of electrons
transferred, E0 is the standard reduction potential, Ecell indicates the
applied potential in the reaction, and [red] and [ox] are the concentra­
tions of the reduced and oxidized states, respectively. The Nernst
equation quantifies the relationship between electrode potential and the
concentration of reactants, demonstrating a direct correlation between
electrode potential and target molecule concentration (Fig. 1a). But at
high analyte levels, the signal stops rising due to saturation.
While electrochemical reactions serve as the fundamental mecha­
nism for detecting target molecules, their implementation and signal
acquisition depend on the support of an electrochemical circuit. An
electrochemical circuit integrates reactions, electron transfer, and signal
conversion into a cohesive system. A properly designed circuit allows
the conversion of weak chemical reaction signals into readily measur­
able electrical signals. Among these, the three-electrode system is the
most common configuration, consisting of a working electrode, counter
electrode, and reference electrode [84]. The working electrode (WE)
directly interacts with the target molecules on its surface, converting
chemical reaction signals into electrical signals; the counter electrode
(CE) provides a pathway for reaction current, ensuring circuit closure;
the reference electrode (RE) offers a stable reference potential, ensuring
the accuracy of potential measurements. The three-electrode configu­
ration achieves target molecule detection by distinctly dividing the roles
of current conduction and potential measurement.
Based on the graphene three-electrode electrochemical sensor sys­
tem, numerous detection methods reflecting redox reaction processes
have emerged. In voltammetry [88], a time-dependent voltage is
applied, and the resulting current-voltage relationship is measured to
produce a voltammogram. The voltammogram assists in analyte iden­
tification, with distinct peak positions corresponding to each analyte,
governed by the compounds’ formal potentials. In Cyclic voltammetry
(CV), The dynamic interplay of redox reactions, depletion layer forma­
tion, and diffusion typically results in a "duck-shaped" voltammogram.
For a freely diffusing electroactive species A, as the potential is scanned
positively to oxidize A (A → A+), the concentration of A near the elec­
trode decreases. Initially, the current increases with voltage following
the Nernst equation until a peak oxidative current is reached. As a
depletion layer forms, diffusion of A to the electrode becomes the
rate-limiting step, causing the current to decrease from its peak, aligning

2.1.4. Long-term effectiveness, reproducibility, and large-scale production
In addition to enhancing the performance of graphene, surface
functionalization demonstrates significant potential in improving the
long-term effectiveness, reproducibility, and scalability of graphenebased devices. However, it also presents numerous challenges. Specif­
ically, graphene surface functionalization enhances its chemical stability
and anti-fouling capability in complex environments by incorporating
functional groups or polymer modifications, thereby improving longterm efficacy. Nevertheless, it may also introduce structural defects
into the graphene lattice, leading to performance degradation [81].
Regarding reproducibility, functionalization facilitates performance
consistency and batch stability of graphene through controlled modifi­
cation strategies. However, overly intricate procedures may hinder
reproducibility. For large-scale production, functionalization expands
the application scope of graphene and enables cost optimization through
efficient, low-cost batch technologies. But challenges such as process
intricacy, scalability issues, and quality assurance persist [82].
To maximize the advantages of surface functionalization, it is
essential to comprehensively consider functionalization approaches,
standardize processing workflows, and explore multifunctional
4

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

Fig. 1. The measurement of graphene-based three-electrode electrochemical sensor: (a) Process in a biosensing system. (b) Repeated scans of cyclic voltammetry.
Reproduced with permissions from Ref. [83]. Copyright 2024 American Chemical Society. (c) The Randles circuit design. Adapted with permissions from Ref. [85].
Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (d) The Randles equivalent circuit and its behavior at low and high frequencies. Adapted with permissions from Ref. [86]. Copyright 2022
Wiley. (e) The Randles equivalent electrical circuit over a wide frequency range. Reproduced with permissions from Ref. [87]. Copyright 2023 American Chemical
Society, under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0.

with the Cottrell equation:
it =

1
nFAD2 C
1 1

π2 t2

parameters by studying an electrochemical system’s response to varying
frequency signals. In experiments, a frequency response analyzer and an
electrochemical interface measure the system’s current response to an
input sinusoidal signal E = E0 sin ωt applied to the sample. The response
is analyzed relative to the generated current I = I0 sin(ωt + ϕ), where ϕ
represents the phase shift. By fitting impedance data, an equivalent
circuit model can be obtained, typically comprising resistors, capacitors,
and constant phase elements. The Randles circuit is a frequently
employed equivalent circuit model in biosensor applications. This model
includes solution resistance (Rs), double-layer capacitance (Cdl), elec­
tron transfer resistance (Ret), and Warburg impedance (W) in parallel
(Fig. 1c). Using this model, system characteristics can be inferred,
typically achieved through impedance spectrum visualization and
fitting impedance data to the model (Fig. 1d).

(2)

Where n = number of electrons transferred in the oxidation (or reduc­
tion) of the analyte, F = Faraday constant, A = active electrode area, D
= diffusion coefficient of the analyte, C = bulk concentration of analyte,
t = time. The voltammogram shape reflects a transition from electro­
chemical to diffusion control. Reversing the scan direction results in a
peak reductive current (Fig. 1b). In bioanalysis, voltammetry is exten­
sively applied as it offers more information and higher selectivity than
amperometry, facilitating compound differentiation. Besides, Electro­
chemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) identifies and evaluates model
5

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

While traditional electrochemical sensors have enhanced sensitivity,
the limitations of working electrode materials continue to challenge the
detection of low-concentration analytes [89,90]. The incorporation of
graphene, especially surface-functionalized graphene, provides a trans­
formative solution for enhancing working electrode performance [91].
Graphene-enhanced electrochemical sensor electrodes, through surface
functionalization, introduce specific molecules or nanostructures,
boosting target molecule binding and sensor selectivity and detection.
Additionally, Graphene’s mechanical flexibility and biocompatibility,
along with its surface-modified properties, render it ideal for wearable
device electrodes, enabling real-time health monitoring and personal­
ized medicine through three-electrode sensors.

2.2.2. Graphene field-effect transistor (GFET)
Unlike electrochemical sensors, field-effect transistor (FET) sensors
respond directly to environmental changes by modulating carrier den­
sity in the channel through electrostatic field effects [60,92]. This
detection mechanism relies on the direct influence of the target on the
channel’s electrical properties, bypassing electrochemical reactions and
providing a notable advantage of high sensitivity [93]. Building on this
principle, graphene field-effect transistors (GFETs) use graphene as the
carrier channel, exhibiting exceptional performance such as rapid
response, high sensitivity, and good specificity, marking a significant
breakthrough in biosensor technology. The remarkable performance of
GFETs originates from their unique structural design and operational

Fig. 2. Operating principles: (a) Solid-gate GFETs (b) Solution-gate GFETs. Adapted with permissions from Ref. [95]. Copyright 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Insight
into solution-gate GFETs operation. Reprinted with permissions from Ref. [96]. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. (d).
6

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

principles, which will be elaborated upon in the subsequent discussion.
Typically, a GFET consists of a substrate, graphene active layer, gate
dielectric, and source, drain, and gate electrodes. Based on the gate
dielectric material, GFETs can be categorized into solid-gate and
solution-gate types (Fig. 2a and b). Solid-gate GFETs operate similarly to
conventional silicon-based field-effect transistors, using gate voltage to
control carrier density within the channel [94,95]. Since biomarkers are
usually present in liquid-phase environments, solution-gate GFETs are
more advantageous for biosensing applications.
The change in the relative position of DNA charges with respect to
the charge plane of graphene before and after the G-quadruplex
structure-switching results in a change in the hole density in graphene,
thereby enhancing the p-type doping characteristics of GFET. Adapted
with permissions from Ref. [102]. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.
Unlike the solid-gate type, solution-gate GFETs use an electrolyte
solution as the gate dielectric, replacing conventional insulating mate­
rials [96]. The mechanism relies on ion dynamics within the electrolyte
solution: applying voltage between the gate and source-drain electrodes
leads to cation and anion formation of two electrochemical double
layers (EDL) at the semiconductor/electrolyte and gate/electrolyte in­
terfaces [93,97]. Gate voltage modulates the potential of the graphene
channel through these double layers, producing carriers (electrons or
holes) within the channel. Driven by the source-drain voltage (VSD),
these carriers flow from the source to the drain, generating current [98].
The process of charge regulation induces notable changes in the chan­
nel’s electrical signals (Fig. 2c). Despite their high sensitivity, GFETs are
prone to environmental noise and interference [99]. In complex bio­
logical samples, nonspecific adsorption or multiple ions can impair
signal accuracy, while graphene surface contamination, humidity, and
temperature fluctuations may compromise detection stability and
reproducibility. Functionalizing the surface can improve target mole­
cule specificity, optimize graphene’s charge distribution, and bolster its
stability and adaptability to environmental conditions [100].
Then, the dynamic process of target molecule capture in graphene
field-effect transistor sensors is illustrated through characteristic curves.
The characteristic curves of GFET include transfer characteristics,
output characteristics, and time response characteristics [71]. The
transfer characteristic curve illustrates the effect of gate voltage (VG) on
source-drain current (ISD), reflecting the trend of carrier density in the
GFET channel changing with the applied electric field. This curve typi­
cally shows a "V" shape, representing the transition of GFET from hole
conduction (p-type) to electron conduction (n-type) under different
voltages. At the Dirac point, also known as the charge neutrality point
(CNP), electron and hole concentrations are equal, resulting in minimal
current. This phenomenon indicates that there is no significant doping
effect in the graphene channel at this point [101]. For example, The
presence of Pb2+ ions causes G-rich DNA strands to form G-quadruplex
structures, pulling negatively charged nucleotides closer to the graphene
surface and increasing the hole density, which enhances p-type doping
and alters the electrical conductivity. This change can be detected by
measuring the drain current of a graphene field-effect transistor (GFET),
enabling label-free Pb2+ ion detection [102] (Fig. 2d).
By analyzing the transfer characteristic curve, the interaction be­
tween target molecules and the sensor can be quantitatively analyzed
through the Dirac point shift, thereby evaluating the sensitivity of the
GFET. Moreover, the curve’s slope (transconductance) offers insights
into carrier mobility, shedding light on the channel material’s electrical
characteristics [103]. Another curve is output characteristic curve de­
scribes the relationship between source-drain current (ISD) and
source-drain voltage (VSD), showcasing the GFET channel’s conduc­
tivity and resistance characteristics [104]. In biosensing applications,
the output characteristic curve can evaluate whether the GFET exhibits
linear response in liquid environments, ensuring the reliability of
real-time monitoring, particularly for analyzing molecular concentra­
tion changes in complex samples (e.g., serum, blood).
The time response characteristic curve further supplements the

dynamic performance evaluation of the sensor. This type of curve re­
cords the variation of source-drain current over time under a fixed
voltage, demonstrating the sensor’s real-time response capability to
changes in target molecule concentration or environmental conditions
[105]. Time response characteristics are vital for rapid detection sce­
narios, including monitoring biomolecular binding/dissociation re­
actions or detecting abrupt environmental changes. GFETs can produce
significant current responses to the presence or concentration changes of
target molecules within an extremely short time, making them partic­
ularly suitable for scenarios such as disease biomarker detection and
environmental monitoring.
By comprehensively analyzing characteristic curves, the perfor­
mance of GFETs is thoroughly evaluated. From the Dirac point shifts and
transconductance changes in transfer characteristic curves, to conduc­
tivity analysis in output characteristic curves, and dynamic detection in
time response characteristics, these features reflect not only the elec­
trical performance of GFETs but also their unique advantages in bio­
sensing, providing a solid foundation for design optimization and
practical applications.
3. Biomarkers
The human body contains various biomarkers, such as cytokines,
immune proteins, glucose, uric acid, lactate, and hormones like dopa­
mine and cortisol. These biomarkers are of great importance in the early
diagnosis, therapeutic monitoring, and health management of diseases
[106–108]. This review aims to explore the application of wearable
graphene-based devices (WGB) in monitoring these biomarkers.
3.1. Cytokines and other immune proteins
Cytokine storm is an acute immune response, and early precise
detection is crucial for preventing severe complications [109–112].
Graphene-based biosensors, owing to their electronic transport proper­
ties and the ease of surface probe modification, enable real-time,
high-sensitivity monitoring of cytokine storms, compensating for the
low sensitivity and slow response of traditional detection methods.
Traditional cytokine detection methods include enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) [113] and bead-based immunoassays
[110]. While these methods are mature and effective, they suffer from
the drawbacks of complex sample labeling processes and long detection
times [114]. Graphene, with its ability to be modified for sensitive
detection of specific biomolecules, can be used to create graphene-based
biosensors that enable rapid, continuous, and label-free detection of
biomarkers, addressing the aforementioned issues. Laliberte [115] et al.
functionalized graphene with PBASE linker molecules to attach nucleic
acid aptamers specific to IL-6, enabling label-free detection. The
biosensor demonstrated high sensitivity, with a detection range of 10
pM–100 nM and a lower detection limit than traditional methods. This
PBASE-based aptamer conjugation strategy is also applicable for the
detection of MMP-9 enzyme molecules [116]. Regarding TNF-α cyto­
kine, Hao [117] et al. employed a nucleic acid aptamer known as VR11
to modify the graphene surface, enabling highly specific detection of
TNF-α, with a detection limit (LOD) of 26 pM (pM). Wang [118] et al.
improved TNF-α detection with a GFET using nucleic acid aptamers and
a PEG nanosheet layer. The aptamers enabled selective binding, while
PEG reduced nonspecific adsorption, enhancing accuracy and lowering
the detection limit to 0.34 pM in undiluted artificial tears. In contrast,
Huang [119] et al. proposed a graphene field-effect transistor (GFET)
sensor integrated with a Janus membrane. The sensor surface was
further functionalized with nucleic acid aptamers that specifically
recognize TNF-α, enabling highly selective binding to the target mole­
cules (Fig. 3a). The sensor utilizes the Janus membrane’s bilayer
structure, combining hydrophobic and hydrophilic layers to automati­
cally guide sweat to the sensor surface, while effectively filtering out
skin debris and airborne particles, ensuring sample purity (Fig. 3b).
7

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

Fig. 3. cytokines and glucose:(a) An illustration of the wearable patch showing the principal components. (b) An illustration of the Janus channel showing the
principal polymer components. Adapted with permission from Ref. [119] Copyright 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) An illustration of detecting CRP along with a
schematic showing the reconstitution of AuNP probes, their delivery to the sensor, and detection of CRP. Adapted with permission from Ref. [123] Copyright 2023
Springer Nature.

Benefiting from the sample processing capability of the Janus membrane
and the precise recognition by nucleic acid aptamers, this sensor
exhibited exceptional sensitivity, with a detection limit of 0.31 pM. In
addition, the sensor’s detection range spans from 0.5 pM to 500 pM,
meeting the detection needs for low-concentration cytokines in sweat. In
further studies, Wang [112] et al. proposed a single-layer graphene
field-effect transistor (SGFET) sensor, transferring a single layer of gra­
phene onto a soft and thin polymer substrate. Nucleic acid aptamers
specific to TNF-α and IFN-γ functionalize graphene via π-π stacking, with
Tween80 surfactant suppressing nonspecific adsorption. This design
achieves highly specific detection, with detection limits of 2.75 pM for
TNF-α and 2.89 pM for IFN-γ.
Furthermore, during the inflammatory response, hepatocytes in the
liver produce C-reactive protein (CRP) in response to cytokine stimu­
lation. CRP is considered a crucial biomarker for various bacterial in­
fections, and in the case of appendicitis, it serves as an indicator for
postoperative complications [120,121]. The elevation of CRP levels also
aids in the detection of conditions such as acute appendicitis, cardio­
vascular diseases, and pediatric infections [122]. To effectively and
accurately detect CRP protein, TU [123] et al. developed a
graphene-based electrochemical sensor for CRP, integrating a micro­
fluidic device to collect sweat and calibrate the sensor. On the func­
tionalized graphene electrode, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) are used to
increase surface area and conductivity, and anti-CRP capture antibodies
are fixed to enable specific binding of CRP molecules in sweat. When
CRP binds to the antibodies on the electrode, the redox marker thionine
generates an electrochemical signal proportional to the CRP concen­
tration, thereby facilitating CRP detection and evaluating systemic

inflammation levels (Fig. 3c). The sensor shows exceptional perfor­
mance, with an ultra-low detection limit of 8 pM and good inter-batch
reproducibility.
3.2. Glucose
Diabetes is a prevalent chronic disease characterized by elevated
blood glucose levels. Regular blood glucose monitoring is one of the
crucial methods for early intervention in diabetes progression [124].
Recent studies indicate that other bodily fluids, such as sweat and
interstitial fluid, can also provide valuable information for glucose
testing and are easier to obtain than blood [125,126]. To measure
glucose concentration, Ji [127] et al. developed a superconducting
graphene film on a flexible substrate using laser engraving technology,
eliminating the need for further metal deposition. The superconducting
graphene film directly detects glucose, avoiding the complexity of
traditional enzyme-based sensors (Fig. 4a). The dynamic detection range
for glucose is 0.5–8 mM (mM), with a detection limit of 0.41 mM.
However, to achieve more effective glucose detection, sensors usu­
ally employ glucose oxidase (GOD) as the biomarker recognition
element, and glucose detection is accomplished by monitoring the
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) produced during the GOD catalytic reaction.
Glucose reacts with oxygen to generate H2O2, which undergoes redox
reactions on the electrode, generating an electrical current. The
magnitude of the current is proportional to the glucose concentration
[128,129]. You [130] et al. successfully developed graphene on a fibroin
substrate using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technology. Glucose
oxidase (GOx) was immobilized in the fibroin film, which not only
8

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

Fig. 4. glucose:(a) Schematic illustration showing the laser engraving process on GF to fabricate the GF-based 3-electrode system. Reprints and permissions from
Ref. [127]. Copyright 2023 Springer Nature Link. (b) Schematic illustrations depict the p-type doping process of graphene via H2O2 reduction and the glucose
sensing process of a graphene FET embedded between a silk/Gox functionalized film and silk substrate. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [130]. Copyright 2014
Elsevier. (c) An illustration of a GFET with AuNPs/RGO nanocomposite-functionalized gate and monolayer graphene channel, potential distribution changes before
and after glucose addition, and transfer curves for different glucose concentrations. Adapted with permission from Ref. [131]. Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (d) An
illustration of an iontophoretic biosensing system for non-invasive glucose sensing, including the system schematic, front view, modification of GA@PB and
CTS/GOx, and the glucose biosensing operation. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [133]. Copyright 2023 Royal Society of Chemistry.

stabilized the enzyme structure but also maintained its activity (Fig. 4b).
Glucose monitoring was accomplished by measuring the current change
between the source and drain electrodes and the Dirac point shift of the
transistor. Gao [131] et al. proposed a graphene electrochemical tran­
sistor and integrated it with a glycerol-based gel electrolyte to detect
glucose levels in human sweat. The glycerol gel electrolyte, a stable and
moisture-retaining medium, replaces traditional liquid electrolytes and
maintains functionality in dry skin conditions (Fig. 4c). This sensor has a
low detection limit of 10 nM (nM) and spans a glucose concentration
range from 10 nM to 25 mM. After 1000 bending cycles, the sensor
showed stability with minimal performance loss, ensuring its stability
during long-term wear. Apart from using gel-based extraction of glucose
from sweat, Yao [132] et al. applied reverse electrodialysis to extract
glucose from interstitial fluid (ISF) integrating the extraction unit with a
detection module into a streamlined device. This dual-electrode sensor
simplifies traditional glucose monitoring, detecting glucose as low as
0.06 μM (μM) without multiple modules. Li [133] et al. leveraged the
electrochemical properties of Prussian Blue (PB) combined with gra­
phene aerogels. As a good electron transfer medium, PB catalyzes the
reduction of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) [134], releasing electrons and
generating an electrical current signal, thereby enabling precise glucose
concentration detection (Fig. 4d). The combination with graphene aer­
ogels further enhanced the catalytic performance of PB, improved the
conductivity and stability of the electrode, and significantly increased
the efficiency of the electrochemical reaction.

Unlike enzyme-based biosensors, Zhao [135] et al. introduced a
flexible, enzyme-free glucose biosensor, developed by embedding cobalt
oxide (Co3O4) nanoparticles in laser-induced graphene (LIG). The sensor
demonstrated a sensitivity of 214 μA mM− 1 cm− 2 and could detect
glucose concentrations from 1 μM to 9 mM, with a detection limit as low
as 0.41 μM. Furthermore, Zhang [136] et al. adopted a novel catalyst by
binding platinum (Pt) single atoms onto cobalt oxide (Co3O4) and
reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanocomposites. This configuration is
designed to enhance glucose detection capabilities through the syner­
gistic catalytic effect, showing a broad detection range (1–800 μM) and a
low detection limit (0.76 μM).
3.3. Metabolites - uric acid, lactate
Metabolism is the process by which organisms convert external en­
ergy and substances into the resources necessary for growth, reproduc­
tion, and the maintenance of life activities, while also responding
adaptively to environmental changes [137]. During this process, or­
ganisms produce a range of metabolites, including intermediates and
end products, which are direct manifestations of metabolic activity
[138]. Among these, uric acid and lactate are two important metabo­
lites, originating from purine metabolism and glycolysis, respectively.
Uric acid is the end product of purine nucleotide degradation, generated
in the liver and excreted via the kidneys, playing a role in purine waste
elimination and antioxidation [139]. Lactate is one of the end products
9

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

of glycolysis, particularly under anaerobic conditions, where it is con­
verted from pyruvate and can be reused as glucose in the liver through
the Cori cycle [140,141]. Abnormal metabolism of uric acid or lactate
can result in conditions like gout and lactic acidosis, potentially causing
adverse health effects. Therefore, the detection of these metabolites is of
significant importance in clinical diagnosis and health monitoring.
Enzyme-catalyzed and electrochemical methods are commonly used
in the detection of uric acid with graphene-based sensors. Sharifuzza­
man [142] et al. achieved highly sensitive detection of uric acid (UA) by
immobilizing uricase on a laser-guided graphene-MXene (LGG-MXene)
scaffold. Furthermore, the redox reaction of uric acid can generate a
current signal on the electrode, enabling quantitative analysis of uric

acid. Zhang [143] et al. optimized the sensor’s performance by
electro-depositing gold clusters (Au) onto the surface of laser-induced
graphene (LIG) to improve conductivity and cover surface defects, fol­
lowed by coating with chitosan to enhance hydrophilicity. This modi­
fication enabled the long-term monitoring of uric acid and pH levels in
human sweat (Fig. 5a). This sensor uses differential pulse voltammetry
(DPV) to apply short voltage pulses, amplifying the reaction signal be­
tween uric acid molecules and the electrode surface, allowing for the
precise detection of trace substances with a detection limit of 0.5 μM and
outstanding stability. Similarly, based on differential voltammetry, Zhao
[144] et al. embedded iron nanocatalysts (FeNCs) into LIG, utilizing
their active surface sites to interact with target molecules such as uric

Fig. 5. metabolites and hormones:(a) Schematic diagram of the C-Au-LIG fabrication process. Adapted with permission from Ref. [143]. Copyright 2022 American
Chemical Society. (b) A wearable lactate biosensor developed by in-situ fabrication of a PB sensing membrane integrated rGO and urchin-like AuNPs on flexible
SPCE. Adapted with permission from Ref. [145]. Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration shows the lactate-NAD + reaction on the graphene channel,
enzyme-functionalization effects on morphology (AFM), and changes in graphene’s electrical properties each functionalization step. Adapted with permission from
Ref. [146]. Copyright 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Schematic illustration for Ti3C2Tx MXene-loaded/LBG-based cortisol biomarker detection. Reprinted with
permission from Ref. [151]. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration showing the electrooxidation mechanism of dopamine and serotonin at the WGP and
the fabrication process of the WS2/graphene heterostructure on a flexible PI electrode, along with a photograph of the WGP electrode. Reproduced with permission
from Ref. [155]. Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH.
10

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

acid and tyrosine, promoting electron transfer and enhancing sensor
performance. The detection limit of this sensor patch for uric acid is
1.37 μM, making it suitable for monitoring physiological concentrations
of uric acid in sweat.
In lactate detection, different enzymes react with lactate to generate
specific products, which can be quantified through electrochemical
signals. Lactate oxidase (LOx) converts lactate into pyruvate and
hydrogen peroxide. The hydrogen peroxide oxidation generates a cur­
rent signal, which is efficiently processed by graphene, enabling highly
sensitive detection. Asaduzzaman [142] et al. modified LOx onto the
surface of laser-induced graphene (LIG) and integrated nanoporous
carbon (H-NPC) into the flexible LIG framework to enhance electro­
catalytic activity. To further enhance the graphene sensor’s performance
in lactate detection, Jiang [145] et al. developed a lactate sensing film
on a flexible substrate using a layer-by-layer spin-coating method,
ensuring uniform Prussian blue (PB) and graphene oxide (GO) layers.
GO was then electrochemically reduced to rGO, improving electrode
conductivity. Urchin-like gold nanoparticles added abundant active sites
for lactate oxidase, boosting sensor performance (Fig. 5b). The biosensor
demonstrated a sensitivity of 40.6 μA/mM/cm2 in the 1–222 μM range,
with a detection limit of 0.8 μM, and 1.9 μA/mM/cm2 sensitivity in a
range up to 25 mM.
In contrast to the lactate oxidase method, Hao and colleagues [146]
designed a wearable biosensor patch called SIGN (Skin Interface Gra­
phene Nanoelectronics). The patch uses 1-pyrene butyric acid succini­
mide ester (PASE) to immobilize lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and
NAD+ onto the graphene surface. LDH catalyzes the reaction of lactate
with NAD+, producing pyruvate, NADH, and H+. NADH alters the car­
rier concentration in the graphene field-effect transistor (G-FET),
creating a detectable current for precise lactate measurement. The patch
incorporates a Janus membrane for sweat direction and impurity
filtration, while a planar electrolyte-gated configuration boosts detec­
tion speed and sensitivity. A TWEEN 80 passivation layer prevents
contamination and interference from other sweat components (Fig. 5c).
The SIGN patch detects lactate levels as low as 0.31 mM and maintains
signal deviation below 6.86 % over a month of continuous use,
demonstrating excellent long-term stability.

sweat.
In dopamine detection research, apart from solving concentration
detection problems, dopamine detection is often interfered with by
other molecules in biological fluids, such as ascorbic acid and uric acid
[152]. Therefore, improving the stability of the sensor is also crucial. Xu
[153] et al. used laser-scribed graphene (LSG) electrodes and modified
the graphene with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT). The
electrochemical activity of PEDOT can activate dopamine molecules,
making it easier for them to undergo oxidation at the working electrode
of the electrochemical sensor [154], thereby enhancing the response
signal to dopamine and effectively reducing interference from
non-target molecules such as ascorbic acid (AA) and uric acid (UA). Kim
[155] et al. used low-temperature plasma-enhanced chemical vapor
deposition (PECVD) to fabricate tungsten disulfide (WS2)/graphene
heterostructures. The WS2/graphene heterostructures selectively adsorb
dopamine and serotonin primarily through π-π interactions and elec­
trostatic interactions, promoting the adsorption of both neurotrans­
mitter molecules on the electrode surface. Meanwhile, the
heterostructure can differentiate their distinct oxidation potentials and
oxidation products, aiding in the identification of these two substances.
Furthermore, the wide bandgap of WS2, the chemical inertness of gra­
phene, and the stability of the heterostructure effectively resist inter­
ference, enhancing the accuracy and reliability of the detection (Fig. 5e).
Consequently, it showed excellent selectivity for detecting dopamine
and serotonin, with detection peaks of 188 mV for each. The detection
limit of the sensor for dopamine is 1.24 μM, while for serotonin it is 0.25
μM.
3.5. Others biomarkers
With the continuous advancement of technology, graphene-based
wearable biosensors have shown great potential in the field of disease
detection, particularly in the detection of respiratory pathogens, iden­
tification of cancer biomarkers, and real-time monitoring of pH changes.
Respiratory pathogens, such as the novel coronavirus, pose a sig­
nificant threat to human health, making fast and accurate detection and
diagnosis of these diseases essential. Li [156] et al. developed a wireless,
battery-free bioelectronic system for rapid SARS-CoV-2 detection
through exhaled breath and aerosols. The graphene surface was func­
tionalized with PBASE, enabling covalent binding of specific antibodies,
including the Spike S1 antibody for recognizing SARS-CoV-2 and others
for variant detection (Fig. 6a). This design enhanced the sensor’s
sensitivity and specificity for efficient virus detection. The system also
integrates machine learning to analyze breathing patterns, biomarkers
like temperature and breathing frequency, offering comprehensive
diagnostic support and infection severity assessment.
Circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA), particularly circulating tumor
DNA (ctDNA), holds significant potential for early cancer diagnosis,
treatment monitoring, and prognostic evaluation [157,158]. Yang and
colleagues [159] modified the graphene surface with tetrahedral DNA
nanostructures (TDNs) and an NgAgo-guided DNA recognition system.
TDNs serve as nanoscaffolds to anchor NgAgo and guide DNA, thereby
enhancing molecular recognition capabilities. The NgAgo protein and
guided DNA combine to specifically bind the target nucleic acid
sequence. The target nucleic acids are then introduced into the detection
region through reverse iontophoresis, with graphene detecting the
electrochemical changes (Fig. 6b). This method achieves a detection
limit as low as 0.3 fM (fM) without the need for amplification, demon­
strating its strong capability in detecting biomarkers related to sepsis
and inflammatory diseases.
Unlike the previous probe types, Yang [160] et al. designed a pro­
grammable CRISPR-Cas9 microneedle patch, which painlessly punc­
tures the skin and enters the dermis, using reverse iontophoresis to
enrich cfDNA on the surface of the microneedles. The microneedle
surface is then modified with catalytically inactive Cas9 (dCas9) and
single-guide RNA (sgRNA), which bind to cfDNA via the CRISPR-Cas9

3.4. Hormones - dopamine, cortisol
Hormones are signaling molecules that are transmitted to distant
organs to regulate various physiological and behavioral functions [147].
Hence, understanding the precise fluctuations in hormone levels within
the human body is critical for better understanding their roles and the
potential health impacts of their imbalance. Hormone levels are an
important diagnostic indicator of potential disease states.
Cortisol levels in physiological fluids vary widely, ranging from
0.004 to 70 μM, depending on the fluid type. In sweat, normal cortisol
concentrations are typically between 0.02 and 0.5 μM. Elevated cortisol
caused by stress can impair the cardiovascular, immune, skeletal, and
endocrine systems [148,149]. So Garg [150] et al. used molecularly
imprinted polymer (MIP) technology to create binding sites specific to
the cortisol molecular structure on laser-induced graphene (LIG) elec­
trodes. This allows for continuous, real-time biomarker analysis without
the need for complex modifications of biological probes. Nah [151] et al.
integrated Ti3C2Tx MXene into laser-ablated graphene (LBG) structures,
reconnecting any broken LBG sheets and improving conductivity.
Furthermore, the MXene modification also enhanced hydrophilicity,
which is crucial for interactions with biological fluids. The hydrophilic
surface promotes liquid penetration and diffusion, allowing sweat to
more efficiently contact the sensor’s detection area, thereby improving
detection efficiency. Finally, cortisol antibodies were immobilized on
the sensor surface via EDC/NHS coupling to ensure selective binding of
cortisol molecules (Fig. 5d). The sensor achieved a detection limit of
3.88 pmol (pM), with a linear range from 10 pmol to 100 nM, making it
highly suitable for detecting physiological concentrations of cortisol in
11

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

Fig. 6. others biomarkers:(a) An illustration shows the structure and components for monitoring exhaled viruses, respiration rate (RR) using the immune biosensor
(IBS), and exhaled breath temperature (EBT) via the temperature biosensor (TBS). Reproduced with permissions from Ref. [156]. Copyright 2023 Springer Nature.
(b) An illustration shows the biosensing interface on a microneedle with TDN anchoring graphene and NgAgo-gDNA, where target nucleic acids are selectively
recognized, generating electrochemical signals based on Gaussian box theory. Reproduced with permissions from Ref. [159]. Copyright 2024 Springer Nature. (c)
Schemic illustration showing the wearable patch fabrication, CRISPR microneedles with dCas9 enzyme and shRNA on graphene, and real-time cfDNA monitoring
using reverse iontophoresis, where cfDNA recognition modulates the electrochemical properties of the graphene layer. Adapted with permissions from Ref. [160].
Copyright 2022 Springer Nature. (d) An illustration shows patterned graphene paper electrodes for real-time sweat sensing, including motion and sweat pH
monitoring, and the sensing mechanisms for both. Adapted with permissions from Ref. [163]. Copyright 2024 Elsevier.

system. The electrochemical signal generated is converted into a
detectable electrical signal, leveraging the excellent conductivity of
graphene for high-sensitivity real-time cfDNA monitoring (Fig. 6c). This
patch detects the binding of the Cas9/sgRNA complex to the target
cfDNA sequence via electrochemical signals, with a detection limit as
low as 1.1 fM. Moreover, the sensor demonstrates high specificity for
detecting cfDNA biomarkers associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV),
sepsis, and kidney transplant rejection.
Physiological processes like dehydration, muscle hypoxia, and
wound healing are strongly correlated with pH changes [161,162]. pH
sensors detect electrochemical potential shifts caused by protonation or
deprotonation of conductive polymers to respond to pH fluctuations.
These changes are manifested in the sensor’s voltage output: proton­
ation increases the charge carrier count, improving conductivity, while
deprotonation reduces charge carrier density and lowers conductivity.
To improve pH sensor performance, researchers have introduced several
innovative designs. Sharifuzzaman [142] et al. functionalized
laser-guided graphene (LGG) with MXene, creating a highly conductive
and flexible composite scaffold through covalent C-O-Ti crosslinking,
and electro-polymerized polyaniline (PANI) for pH measurements. This
sensor shows a linear response within the pH range of 4–9, with a
sensitivity of − 57.03 mV/pH. Additionally, Wang [163] et al. employed
a polyaniline/polypyrrole (PANI/PPY) material combination to measure
sweat pH changes through its electrochemical response. They used a
bacterial cellulose (BC) paper structure to concentrate hydrogen ions,
thereby improving the sensor’s sensitivity to pH variations. The sensor
shows a sensitivity of 68 mV/pH, which is more than 30 % higher than
conventional sensors (Fig. 6d).

4. Integration and practical applications
In human body fluids, sweat, tears, and interstitial fluid are ideal
candidates for non-invasive monitoring owing to their direct accessi­
bility. To optimize the extraction of physiological fluids and enhance
sensor sensitivity, graphene, renowned for its superior mechanical
properties, is integrated with flexible and deformable substrates. This
approach facilitates the development of WGB in various wearable forms,
including patches, contact lenses, microneedles, and textiles, enabling
seamless adaptation to body surfaces with complex curvatures. Those
design not only simplifies physiological fluid sampling but also ensures
comfort during wear, effectively fulfilling the key demands of noninvasive monitoring. Additionally, by integrating diverse modules,
WGB can perform long-term, real-time, and effective biomarker moni­
toring in various environments [164–166]. Simultaneously, by inte­
grating actuators, WGB can intervene in and alleviate certain diseases.
Therefore, exploring how diverse wearable forms and modular designs
of WGB can be combined will help adapt more flexibly to various
application scenarios, comprehensively supporting precise physiological
fluid monitoring and effective disease intervention.
4.1. Patch
In biological detection, a patch is a thin device integrating sensors,
electronics, and functional materials, designed to adhere to the skin for
monitoring physiological signals and body fluids. Polyimide (PI) offers
excellent flexibility and mechanical robustness, serving as electrode
material, insulation, or structural support in flexible biosensor fabrica­
tion [167]. By inducing polyimide (PI) with lasers to generate graphene
12

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

(LIG), a nanoporous structure is formed, greatly enhancing surface area,
adsorption capacity, and the diffusion of gases and liquids, while
simplifying the preparation process [168–170]. These good properties
make PI widely applicable in graphene biosensors patch (GBP).
During physical activity, efficiently extracting sweat and accurately

detecting biomarkers in complex environments is a challenge. To
address this, Yang [171] et al. designed a multi-module graphene bio­
sensing patch (MGBP) capable of effectively extracting sweat and
detecting biomarkers such as uric acid and tyrosine. The patch uses CO2
laser technology to fabricate graphene electrodes, temperature and

Fig. 7. the wearable form of patch:(a) Schematic illustration of a laser-engraved sensor with a microfluidic module and LEG-based sensors for sweat UA and Tyr
detection, sweat rate estimation, and monitoring temperature. Reproduced with permissions from Ref. [171]. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. (b) Schematic di­
agram of a glucose sensor developed based on PDMS modified by PEG for continuous analysis of swear. Reproduced with permissions from Ref. [172]. Copyright
2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Schematic illustration shows the design, assembly, and application of microfluidic patch for sweat biosensing. Reproduced with per­
missions from Ref. [173]. Copyright 2022, Springer Nature.
13

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

strain sensors on PI films, and microfluidic channels with reservoirs on
medical adhesive, improving sweat sampling efficiency and accuracy.
MGBP encapsulated with PI and medical adhesives uses calibrated
temperature and strain sensors while microfluidics minimizes sweat
impurities, boosting real-time and continuous detection (Fig. 7a). The
patch accurately detects uric acid and tyrosine concentrations in sweat
without modifying the LIG working electrode surface, showing high
correlation with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and
commercial colorimetric kits. Lorestani [172] et al. enhanced the hy­
drophilicity of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) by PEG modification,
facilitating sweat collection and transport. Laser-patterned and reduced
LIG electrodes enable a stable and sensitive platform for non-enzymatic
glucose and dual pH sensing. Additionally, by integrating a flexible
temperature sensor based on LIG, the patch can calibrate glucose
detection through simultaneous temperature and pH measurements.
With an integrated microfluidic network, the device demonstrates po­
tential for convenient, accurate, and continuous sweat analysis under
various environmental conditions (Fig. 7b). Furthermore, Wang [173]
et al. developed an MGBP with an ion-conducted sweat induction
module (IP) for detecting metabolites and nutrients in sweat. A micro­
current transmitted to the gel drives carbachol ions into the skin, trig­
gering sweat gland activation for sweat secretion. Sweat flows through a
microfluidic module over an LIG electrode with molecularly imprinted
polymers and redox nanoparticles for analysis, while a temperature
sensor calibrates the system (Fig. 7c). Through this process, the MGBP
can monitor amino acid intake and levels in real-time during exercise
and assess the risk of metabolic syndrome.
Although PI materials are commonly used as substrate materials,
many other polymer materials can also serve as substrates and exhibit
different effects. For example, materials such as polyethylene tere­
phthalate (PET) and PDMS offer excellent mechanical flexibility and
biocompatibility. Wang [174] et al. designed a renewable graphene
field-effect transistor patch (GFETP), where the Nafion membrane
effectively suppresses nonspecific adsorption, reducing interference
with aptamer-target molecule specific binding. The Nafion membrane is
also reusable; dissolving it removes attached target and probe mole­
cules, allowing the GFET patch to be regenerated and reused. The
rational structural design of the GFET patch allows it to endure multiple
folding cycles without significant mechanical damage. Huang [175]
et al. introduced a PET-based GFETP for L-cysteine detection, immobi­
lizing the high-affinity receptor PEMA on the graphene surface, enabling
precise measurement of L-cysteine concentrations in tears through
output characteristic curves. Moreover, in the field of saliva detection,
Mannoor [176] et al. proposed an innovative approach by printing
graphene onto water-soluble silk substrates and utilizing the dissolution
of the silk matrix to achieve efficient transfer and intimate integration of
GBP on biomaterial surfaces such as tooth enamel.

effectively and improving energy transfer efficiency for power supply
[183–185]. The combination of these technologies ensures that contact
lenses not only provide excellent wearing comfort but also efficiently
monitor biosignals.
Kim [186] et al. introduced a contact lens designed for wireless
glucose monitoring. This contact lens integrates graphene/silver nano­
wire (G/AgNW) hybrid electrodes, an Ecoflex silicone elastomer layer,
and a silver nanowire antenna on a Parylene substrate, forming a
sandwich-like structure. For glucose detection, a field-effect transistor
with graphene-AgNW electrodes and glucose oxidase (GOD) on the
graphene channel catalyzes glucose oxidation. The reaction produces
gluconic acid and hydrogen peroxide, increasing charge carriers and
drain current, proportional to glucose concentration (Fig. 8a). Resis­
tance changes also affect the sensor’s parameter at a specific resonance
frequency. The electrodes and antenna are designed as an RLC (resis­
tor-inductor-capacitor) circuit, enabling glucose monitoring via radio
frequency detection. External antennas enable wireless reading of
reflection changes, allowing glucose level monitoring (Fig. 8b). The
entire system operates without an external power source, offering a
non-invasive, real-time solution for monitoring ocular health, making
glucose monitoring more convenient and comfortable. Park [187] et al.
designed a Parylene-based smart contact lens integrating a glucose
sensor, display, and antenna. The contact lens is powered by wireless RF
signals, converting received AC signals into DC power via a rectifier
circuit to power the glucose sensor and LED display pixels. The glucose
sensor’s graphene channel is modified with glucose oxidase (GOD) and
catalase (CAT), enabling selective glucose detection in tears and
generating resistance changes, which are directly displayed via LED
feedback (Fig. 8c). Moreover, the design ensures comfort and visual
clarity, validated for reliability and safety in live rabbit studies. To
achieve more precise measurement of low-concentration biomarkers, Ku
[188] et al. designed a GFET-contact lens (GFETCL) for real-time cortisol
level detection in tears. The lens incorporates a cortisol sensor, AgN­
F/AgNW composite antenna, and an NFC chip. The GFETCL detects
cortisol in tears as monoclonal antibodies bind cortisol, altering the
graphene channel’s conductivity and modulating the drain current.
Signal changes are digitized, read by an NFC chip, and wirelessly sent to
a smartphone through a transparent antenna (Fig. 9a). Additionally, the
system uses passive components like capacitors and resistors for stability
and accuracy, and rigid islands protecting sensitive electronics and
ensuring durability. In this context, the sensor can detect extremely low
cortisol concentrations in tears, with a detection limit as low as 10
pg/mL, which is significantly below the typical range of 1–40 ng/mL
found in human tears.
Jang [189] et al. designed an integrated system for real-time remote
detection and treatment of chronic ocular surface inflammation (OSI).
The system comprises a soft smart contact lens for diagnosis and a heat
patch attached to the eyelid for thermotherapy to alleviate OSI. Re­
searchers integrated a GFET into the Elastofilcon A-based smart contact
lens, with electrodes made of ultra-long metal nanofibers (AgNF) to
connect circuit components while maintaining the lens’s transparency
and flexibility. Pyrrole linkers anchored F(ab’)2 fragments onto the
graphene surface, facilitating the quantitative measurement of MMP-9
concentration in tears by analyzing GFET drain current changes.
Detection data is wirelessly sent to a smartphone through an NFC chip. If
OSI is detected, the smartphone app transmits commands to the heat
patch. The Bluetooth module in the heat patch receives the command
and controls the heating film’s temperature via a microcontroller unit
(MCU). This process promotes meibum secretion from the meibomian
glands of the upper and lower eyelids, stabilizes the tear film, and al­
leviates OSI symptoms (Fig. 9b).

4.2. Contact lens
Biomarkers in tears demonstrate significant diagnostic potential in
the prediction, prevention, and personalized treatment of ocular and
systemic diseases, providing critical support for precision medicine
[177–179]. In this context, contact lenses, as integrated devices adhered
to the eyeball, require materials with biocompatibility, mechanical
flexibility, wettability, and transparency to ensure wearer comfort,
avoid ocular allergies, and maintain good visual performance. Materials
such as Parylene [180,181] and PET [182] are ideal choices for inte­
grating biosensors into contact lenses due to their excellent biocom­
patibility, mechanical flexibility, and high transparency. Such materials
enable precise conformation to the eyeball’s curvature, improving
comfort while ensuring the stable performance of sensor components.
Regarding sensor circuitry, innovative spiral electrode designs maintain
conductive integrity during lens movement, improving reliability and
durability. Meanwhile, the spiral wiring enhances coupling efficiency
with external magnetic fields, capturing magnetic field changes more

4.3. Microneedles (MN)
Differing from patches and contact lenses that adhere to the body
surface to extract biofluids, microneedles create micron-sized channels
14

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

Fig. 8. the wearable form of contact lens: (a) Schematic illustration shows a contact lens sensor integrating glucose and pressure sensors. (b) Schematic illustration
shows a contact lens sensor with its detection mechanism and wireless sensing circuit. Reproduced with permissions from Ref. [186]. Copyright 2017 Springer
Nature. (c) Schematic illustration shows a smart contact lens circuit and operation, where wireless power activates LED and glucose sensor, turning off the LED at
high glucose levels. Reproduced with permissions from Ref. [187]. Copyright 2018 AAAS.

15

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

Fig. 9. the wearable form of contact lens: (a) Schematic illustration shows the C-Mab immobilization process, design and components of a smart contact with a
cortisol sensor, and its cortisol measurement mechanism. Reproduced with permissions from Ref. [188]. Copyright 2020 AAAS. (b) Schematic illustrations of the
integrated system of the diagnostic and therapeutic devices for the real-time monitoring and therapy of chronic OSI. Reproduced with permissions from Ref. [189].
Copyright 2021 AAAS.

on the skin, allowing sensors to bypass the stratum corneum, improve
transdermal penetration efficiency, and detect biomarkers at specific
depths [190]. Compared to traditional injections, microneedles cause
less skin damage and minimal pain. These features render microneedles
(MN) ideal for detecting biomarkers in interstitial fluid.
Jin [191] et al. developed a minimally invasive electrode-based
biosensor, Pt/rGO microneedle (MN), for detecting H2O2 biomarkers
in interstitial fluid, indicative of oxidative stress. During the preparation
process, Laser processing was employed to fabricate conductive micro­
needle arrays on stainless steel substrates, followed by layer-by-layer
self-assembly and chemical reduction to form Pt/rGO nanohybrids on
the microneedle surface. Additionally, a polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)

coating, dissolvable in interstitial fluid, protects the Pt/rGO nano­
structure from damage during skin insertion (Fig. 10a). In pigskin and in
vivo mouse tests, Pt/rGO exposed to interstitial fluid catalyzed the
reduction of H2O2. Using cyclic voltammetry, results showed significant
current signals in the presence of H2O2. Wang [192] et al. developed a
wearable graphene-based electrochemical biosensor for detecting ke­
tones and glucose. Ceramic microneedles fabricated via 3D printing
guide interstitial fluid to graphene electrodes for enzymatic
reaction-based detection.
Unlike rigid materials, organic polymers used as microneedle sub­
strate materials reduce device weight due to their low density and me­
chanical flexibility, improving adhesion to the human body surface and
16

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

Fig. 10. The wearable form of mirconeedles: (a) Illustration of a transdermal H2O2 biosensor with Pt/rGO-coated microneedles, protected by a dissolvable PVP
layer, enabling painless skin penetration and in vivo H2O2 sensing. Reproduced with permissions from Ref. [191]. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (b) Schematic
illustration presents the MeHA PP-GO HMN electrode as a flexible working electrode in a three-electrode sensor, with its synthesis, material interactions, and
incorporation of PEDOT:PSS and GO in a MeHA hydrogel network. Adapted with permissions from Ref. [193], under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 License. (c)
Schematic illustration shows a microneedle system, including its schematic, photographs of the microneedle on skin, a PS microneedle sensor with graphene-PB
electrodes, an electroosmotic micropump, and its operating principle. Adapted with permissions from Ref. [194]. Copyright 2024 Springer Nature.

enhancing user comfort. Yang [160] et al. introduced a
CRISPR-Cas9-based programmable microneedle patch (MNP) for
long-term, real-time cfDNA monitoring. The microneedle substrate uses
plasma-treated PDMS to ensure biocompatibility. Among organic poly­
mers, hydrogels’ porous structure allows efficient absorption and
retention of biofluids, enabling more effective biomarker detection.
Shirzadi [193] et al. developed a hydrogel microneedle patch (HMNP)
composed
of
PEDOT:PSS.
Using
polyethylene
glycol
methacrylate-modified hyaluronic acid (MeHA) as the hydrogel frame­
work, the highly conductive polymer PEDOT:PSS was crosslinked with
graphene oxide (GO) to form a stable hydrogel network. Meanwhile, GO
sheets are effectively dispersed in the hydrogel network, avoiding stress
concentration and enhancing electrode mechanical properties. In vivo
experiments showed that HMN electrodes penetrate approximately 80
μm into rat skin. Ferro/ferricyanide in ISF was employed as a model
biomarker to assess HMNP electrode performance (Fig. 10b). Lastly,
microneedles are not limited to singular detection tools, Liu [194] et al.
developed a multifunctional integrated microneedle patch for
closed-loop diabetes management. PS-based microneedles with
graphene-glucose oxidase (GOD) composite electrodes detect glucose in
interstitial fluid collected by the microneedle array. Upon detecting
glucose levels above a set threshold, a micropump is triggered to release
insulin from a reservoir, delivering it via hollow microneedles to the
dermis for systemic circulation and blood glucose reduction. Simulta­
neously, the integrated circuit board automatically adjusts insulin
dosage based on the sensor-detected glucose concentration, maintaining
blood glucose within a normal range (Fig. 10c).

4.4. Textiles
Traditional 2D planar or curved shapes (e.g., patches, contact lenses,
and microneedles) have certain limitations, such as fixed shapes and
poor adaptability, which cannot fully meet comfort requirements.
Therefore, graphene composite fibers, as a 1D material, can be woven
into textiles of various shapes and sizes, offering high flexibility, com­
fort, and breathability to meet diverse needs and provide broader
application scenarios [195–197]. Yao and colleagues [132] innovatively
designed a graphene textile biosensor (GTB) capable of detecting
glucose in interstitial fluid. This sensor utilizes electrochemical fibers
made of graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNTs), demonstrating
outstanding conductivity, mechanical strength, and catalytic perfor­
mance [198–200]. During detection, directional ion electrophoresis is
first used to extract interstitial fluid, followed by amperometry with the
two electrodes to measure glucose concentration in the fluid. Chu [201]
et al. designed a GTB for cytokine detection. The sensor’s electro­
chemical fibers are functionalized with gold nanoparticles on CNT/G
fibers, with high-affinity IL-6 aptamers immobilized via Au-S bonding
on the gold-modified CNT/G fibers (Fig. 11a). This electrochemical
fabric achieves a detection limit of 280 fg/mL for IL-6 monitoring. This
flexible, breathable fabric adapts to various body parts and can monitor
different biomarkers by substituting aptamers, making it a versatile
sweat analysis platform. Departing from CNT/G fibers, Napier [202]
et al. developed a multifunctional GTB for lactate detection using
reduced graphene oxide (rGO) fibers. The GTB yarn is woven from four
fibers: 1) a PtNP-rGO fiber coated with Nafion, LOx enzyme, and PU
membranes as the working electrode for lactate detection; 2) a
PtNP-rGO fiber modified with platinum nanoparticles as the counter
electrode; 3) an rGO fiber coated with Ag/AgCl film as the reference
17

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

Fig. 11. The wearable form of textile: (a) An illustration shows sensing fabric made from woven functional fibers and its application as wearable sensors in various
forms. Adapted with permissions from Ref. [201]. Copyright 2023 Elsevier. (b) the multi-sensing lactate braid comprises four fibers: three for lactate sensing
(reference, counter, and enzymatic electrodes) and one for pH calibration with a polymeric ISE membrane on a ferrocene-functionalized rGO fiber. Adapted with
permissions from Ref. [202]. Copyright 2024 Springer Nature. (c) Schematic graph shows the process of creating fLEG on fabric via transfer printing and laser
engraving, its PI-based principle, a cross-section of fLEG on fabric, and a smart wristband for TNF-α sweat detection. Reprinted with permissions from Ref. [203].
under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0.

electrode; and 4) an rGO fiber coated with pH-sensitive polymer film as a
pH sensor (Fig. 11b). During detection, sweat penetrates the yarn, and
the lactate sensor and pH sensor generate electrical signals corre­
sponding to lactate concentration and pH value. Collected electrical
signals are processed by a signal circuit and transmitted wirelessly
through Bluetooth or similar technologies to smartphones or other
devices.
Unlike using one-dimensional materials to address the limitations of
two-dimensional planes, Ma [203] et al. proposed a laser engraving
method for fabricating graphene on textiles, applicable to various fabric
types. First, the PI precursor was transferred onto the textile surface
through hot pressing to form a patterned PI layer. Next, a CO2 laser was
used to engrave the PI layer, converting it into graphene and forming
graphene patterns. Finally, the PI layer residues and impurities gener­
ated during laser engraving were removed using a solvent wash, and the
sample was dried to complete patterned graphene fabrication (Fig. 11c).
Following this, TNF-α aptamers were immobilized on the
laser-patterned graphene surface, creating a smart wristband with an
integrated TNF-α immunosensor. The detection limit for TNF-α was
1.155 pg/mL, with a linear range of 10–1000 pg/mL. Ma [204] et al.
successfully fabricated highly compatible graphene nanofilms through

simple oil-water self-assembly, with surfaces decorated by electroactive
Prussian blue (PB) and photoresponsive quantum dots (QDs). On tex­
tiles, the hydrogen peroxide sensor exhibited a sensitivity of 53.8 μA
mM− 1 cm− 2 and a detection limit of 1.49 μM, while the glucose
biosensor showed a sensitivity of 37.24 μA mM− 1 cm− 2 and a detection
limit of 11.2 μM. Alternatively, Salahandish [205] et al. utilized the
properties of conductive inks to develop a strip-shaped immunosensor
by mixing graphene nanosheets with PEDOT:PSS conductive polymer
ink, embedding it into a screen-printed carbon matrix to enable auto­
mated sensing without complex electrode modification. The immuno­
sensor exhibited a detection limit of 281.7 fg/mL and a sensitivity of
322.6 Ω mL/pg/mm2, with good linearity in clinically relevant con­
centration ranges.
5. Conclusion and outlook
Combining the composite properties of graphene with other mate­
rials and advanced biosensor detection technologies, wearable graphene
biosensors have brought groundbreaking advancements to the field of
wearable health monitoring devices. Particularly in real-time tracking of
biomarkers in sweat, tears, saliva and interstitial fluid, this technology
18

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

has introduced numerous innovative and efficient design concepts.
Leveraging graphene’s exceptional material properties, such as zero
bandgap, high electron mobility, low noise characteristics, and surface
functionalization, electrochemical and field-effect transistor sensors can
detect extremely low concentrations, significantly enhancing sensitivity
and specificity. Among these, graphene surface functionalization has
significantly improved the performance of sensors fabricated from it. By
introducing antibacterial molecules or functional groups, functionalized
graphene enhances biocompatibility while simultaneously improving
antibacterial properties. Introducing specific molecular probes onto
graphene surfaces enables specific binding with target biomarkers,
enhancing the sensitivity and selectivity of sensors. Passivation of gra­
phene surfaces minimizes nonspecific adsorption, enhancing sensor
stability and reusability. These advancements have endowed graphene
sensors with higher performance and reliability in health monitoring.
Different wearable forms of graphene sensors, with their superior me­
chanical flexibility and biocompatibility, can snugly fit onto skin and
eyes, ensuring durability and stability in health monitoring even during
frequent movements. Furthermore, integrating with various functional
modules has expanded the applicable detection environments for these
graphene sensors and enabled remote real-time monitoring, further
enhancing the intelligence of health management. These devices have
already demonstrated great potential in non-invasive detection of dis­
eases such as inflammation, diabetes, gout, and heart diseases.
Meanwhile, it is noteworthy that graphene possesses not only
excellent electrical signals but also outstanding optical and thermal
properties. Graphene’s extensive light absorption from ultraviolet to
infrared wavelengths renders it ideal for wide-spectrum optical sensing
elements [206]. This material can monitor subtle changes in biomarkers
through variations in light absorption or scattering. Combined with
surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) or fiber-optic sensing tech­
nology, graphene enhances sensitivity for detecting low-concentration
molecules [207]. Furthermore, the integration of graphene’s electrical
and optical sensors supports multi-biomarker detection, enhancing
overall sensor performance. Beside its electrical and optical capabilities,
graphene boasts exceptional thermal conductivity, with theoretical
single-layer values of 3000–5000 W/m⋅K, vastly surpassing metals like
copper (~400 W/m⋅K) [208]. This exceptional property arises from its
unique two-dimensional lattice structure and strong carbon-carbon
bonds, enabling rapid phonon-mediated heat transfer [209]. High
thermal conductivity makes graphene an ideal heat dissipation material,
capable of rapidly and evenly distributing heat to prevent localized
overheating. Consequently, graphene’s thermal properties enable mul­
tiple sensor modules to function concurrently without generating
excessive heat, promoting device integration and compactness. wear­
able graphene biosensors can integrate various technologies to reduce
diagnostic inaccuracies caused by interindividual differences in certain
diseases. For instance, using big data to establish personalized health
baselines combined with patients’ historical health data can mitigate
misjudgments caused by individual variability [210]. Machine learning
and AI facilitate pattern recognition, identifying consistent interindi­
vidual deviations to enhance the precision of positive and negative
result differentiation [211,212]. Through these methods, challenges
posed by individual differences can be effectively addressed, enabling
more precise disease diagnoses.
However, in the research and application of WGB, several critical
challenges remain. In electrical biosensors, when a solution containing
target molecules contacts the energized graphene, an electric double
layer (EDL) forms at the interface, with equal and opposite charges
[213]. Due to the Debye screening effect in the EDL [214,215], target
molecules beyond the Debye length (λD) have their electric field effect
shielded, impairing the distribution of carriers within the sensor and
thus lowering sensitivity. Mitigating the Debye screening effect involves
adjusting channel material morphology and surface functionalization,
such as 3D nanostructures [216] or polymer and lipid layers [217] to
reduce ion buildup and extend the Debye length, or employing electric

field perturbations like high-frequency AC or DC fields to destabilize the
EDL and improve sensitivity [218]. These methods collectively offer
new possibilities for improving sensor performance and expanding their
applications in biological detection. In wearable sensors, data acquisi­
tion and transmission typically rely on integrated circuits (ICs). How­
ever, ICs have certain limitations in mechanical flexibility compared to
sensor detection units. Especially in environments with frequent joint
movements or complex human body surface curves, ICs struggle to
achieve close adhesion to the body surface. Poor adhesion hinders
effective stacking between ICs and sensor units, limiting miniaturiza­
tion. To overcome ICs’ mechanical inflexibility, graphene electronic
tattoos could redefine IC and detection unit layouts in future designs.
This graphene-based tattoo can seamlessly conform to the body’s nat­
ural contours, including joints and complex skin curves, offering me­
chanical adaptability absent in traditional ICs [219]. Graphene’s high
conductivity ensures rapid electronic signal transmission, making these
tattoos efficient data acquisition and transmission channels. Advancing
research into human skin reveals it as not only a protective barrier but
also an electrolyte, offering new possibilities for signal transmission
[220]. Kireev and colleagues [221] developed an innovative graphene
electronic tattoo. By incorporating a Nafion layer into the graphene
electronic tattoo, the layer simulates neural signal transmission by
altering its electrochemical state. Similar to electrochemical
random-access memory (EC-RAM), the Nafion layer transforms the
electronic tattoo into a neuromorphic bioelectronic device, achieving
neuromorphic functionality. Neuromorphic features enable intelligent
signal processing and transmission via the skin, ensuring enhanced ef­
ficiency and precision. In commercial applications, the commercializa­
tion of WGB encounters numerous regulatory challenges. Firstly,
medical device certification processes such as FDA and CE are complex,
potentially delaying product launch. Secondly, data privacy and security
regulations (such as GDPR and the Data Security Law) impose strict
requirements on the collection and use of health data, necessitating the
integration of privacy protection mechanisms in product design. How­
ever, the pathway of commercialization provides crucial support for
optimizing regulatory policies. During the research and development
phase, technologies like inkjet printing and laser-induced graphene
(LIG) enhance sensor sensitivity, stability, and biocompatibility, offering
support for the formulation of more rigorous technical standards. During
the mass production phase, companies optimize manufacturing pro­
cesses (such as chemical vapor deposition) to reduce costs and improve
efficiency, and these practical experiences help regulatory agencies
better understand the risks in production. Additionally, the clinical data
and user feedback collected during the market promotion phase validate
the technology’s safety and effectiveness, offering valuable insights for
regulatory agencies to refine approval procedures. Therefore, while
stringent regulatory requirements increase commercialization diffi­
culties, the data and experience gained during commercialization
contribute to improving the regulatory system, creating a positive
feedback loop. Looking ahead, with technological advancements and
regulatory improvements, wearable graphene biosensors are likely to
gain wider adoption across global markets.
Come to an end, as technology progresses and costs decline, wear­
able graphene biosensors are integral to enhancing life quality and
facilitating disease prevention and treatment. It is foreseeable that with
ongoing technological progress and cost reductions, these products will
become more widespread and convenient, contributing significantly to
global health.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Jiawen Song: Writing – original draft. Yang Luo: Writing – original
draft, Funding acquisition. Zhuang Hao: Writing – review & editing,
Writing – original draft, Resources, Project administration. Menglong
Qu: Writing – original draft. Cong Huang: Resources, Investigation.
Ziran Wang: Methodology. Jun Yang: Investigation. Qingrou Liang:
19

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

Investigation. Yuan Jia: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisi­
tion. Qiuming Song: Writing – review & editing. Qiuting Zhang:
Investigation. Sida Luo: Methodology.

[13] K. Jiang, J. Wang, Q. Li, L. Liu, C. Liu, S. Fan, Superaligned carbon nanotube
arrays, films, and yarns: a road to applications, Adv. Mater. 23 (2011)
1154–1161, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201003989.
[14] P. Izquierdo-García, J.M. Fernández-García, N. Martín, Twenty years of graphene:
from pristine to chemically engineered nano-sized flakes, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 146
(2024) 32222–32234, https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.4c12819.
[15] M.J. Mcallister, J.-L. Li, D.H. Adamson, H.C. Schniepp, A.A. Abdala, J. Liu,
M. Herrera-Alonso, D.L. Milius, R. Car, R.K. Prud’homme, I.A. Aksay, Single sheet
functionalized graphene by oxidation and thermal expansion of graphite, Chem.
Mater. 19 (2007) 4396–4404, https://doi.org/10.1021/cm0630800.
[16] M.M.J. Treacy, T.W. Ebbesen, J.M. Gibson, Exceptionally high Young’s modulus
observed for individual carbon nanotubes, Nature 381 (1996) 678–680, https://
doi.org/10.1038/381678a0.
[17] M.J. Treacy, T.W. Ebbesen, J.M. Gibson, Exceptionally high Young’s modulus
observed for individual carbon nanotubes, Nature 381 (1996) 678–680.
[18] A. Peigney, C. Laurent, E. Flahaut, R. Bacsa, A. Rousset, Specific surface area of
carbon nanotubes and bundles of carbon nanotubes, Carbon 39 (2001) 507–514.
[19] S. Roy, P. Bermel, Electronic and optical properties of ultra-thin 2D tungsten
disulfide for photovoltaic applications, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 174 (2018)
370–379.
[20] A. Falin, M. Holwill, H. Lv, W. Gan, J. Cheng, R. Zhang, D. Qian, M.R. Barnett, E.
J. Santos, K.S. Novoselov, Mechanical properties of atomically thin tungsten
dichalcogenides: WS2, WSe2, and WTe2, ACS Nano 15 (2021) 2600–2610.
[21] G. An, C. Lu, C. Xiong, Solid-phase reaction synthesis of mesostructured tungsten
disulfide material with a high specific surface area, Mater. Res. Bull. 46 (2011)
1323–1326.
[22] J. Cheng, L. Gao, T. Li, S. Mei, C. Wang, B. Wen, W. Huang, C. Li, G. Zheng,
H. Wang, H. Zhang, Two-dimensional black phosphorus nanomaterials: emerging
advances in electrochemical energy storage science, Nano-Micro Lett. 12 (2020)
179, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40820-020-00510-5.
[23] A. Carvalho, M. Wang, X. Zhu, A.S. Rodin, H. Su, A.H. Castro Neto, Phosphorene:
from theory to applications, Nat. Rev. Mater. 1 (2016) 1–16.
[24] Q. Wei, X. Peng, Superior mechanical flexibility of phosphorene and few-layer
black phosphorus, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104 (2014).
[25] L. Li, J. Yang, On mechanical behaviors of few-layer black phosphorus, Sci. Rep. 8
(2018) 3227.
[26] Y. Jiang, Applications and perspectives of Ti3C2Tx MXene in electrochemical
energy storage systems, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. (2025) 100948.
[27] S. Wan, X. Li, Y. Chen, N. Liu, S. Wang, Y. Du, Z. Xu, X. Deng, S. Dou, L. Jiang,
Ultrastrong MXene films via the synergy of intercalating small flakes and
interfacial bridging, Nat. Commun. 13 (2022) 7340.
[28] X.-B. Min, F.-S. Liu, Y.-Y. Wang, Y.-Q. Yan, H.-Y. Wang, Synthesis and
electrochemical behavior of monolayer-Ti3C2Tx for capacitive deionization,
J. Cent. S. Univ. 29 (2022) 359–372, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11771-022-48930.
[29] A.K. Geim, K.S. Novoselov, The rise of graphene, Nat. Mater. 6 (2007) 183–191,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat1849.
[30] Y. Wang, P. Yang, L. Zheng, X. Shi, H. Zheng, Carbon nanomaterials with sp2 or/
and sp hybridization in energy conversion and storage applications: a review,
Energy Storage Mater. 26 (2020) 349–370, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ensm.2019.11.006.
[31] A.H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N.M.R. Peres, K.S. Novoselov, A.K. Geim, The
electronic properties of graphene, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81 (2009) 109–162, https://
doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.81.109.
[32] K.I. Bolotin, K.J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim, H.
L. Stormer, Ultrahigh electron mobility in suspended graphene, Solid State
Commun. 146 (2008) 351–355, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssc.2008.02.02.
[33] F. Schedin, A.K. Geim, S.V. Morozov, E.W. Hill, P. Blake, M.I. Katsnelson, K.
S. Novoselov, Detection of individual gas molecules adsorbed on graphene, Nat.
Mater. 6 (2007) 652–655, https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat1967.
[34] A.K. Geim, Graphene: status and prospects, Science 324 (2009) 1530–1534,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1158877.
[35] D.G. Papageorgiou, I.A. Kinloch, R.J. Young, Mechanical properties of graphene
and graphene-based nanocomposites, Prog. Mater. Sci. 90 (2017) 75–127,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.2017.07.004.
[36] M. Ioniţă, G.M. Vlăsceanu, A.A. Watzlawek, S.I. Voicu, J.S. Burns, H. Iovu,
Graphene and functionalized graphene: extraordinary prospects for
nanobiocomposite materials, Compos. B Eng. 121 (2017) 34–57, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.compositesb.2017.03.031.
[37] R. Teixeira-Santos, S. Belo, R. Vieira, F.J.M. Mergulhão, L.C. Gomes, Graphenebased composites for biomedical applications: surface modification for enhanced
antimicrobial activity and biocompatibility, Biomolecules 13 (2023) 1571.
[38] P. Labroo, Y. Cui, Flexible graphene bio-nanosensor for lactate, Biosens.
Bioelectron. 41 (2013) 852–856, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2012.08.024.
[39] K.S. Novoselov, A.K. Geim, S.V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S.V. Dubonos, I.
V. Grigorieva, A.A. Firsov, Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films,
Science 306 (2004) 666–669, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1102896.
[40] J. Zhao, P. Ji, Y. Li, R. Li, K. Zhang, H. Tian, K. Yu, B. Bian, L. Hao, X. Xiao,
W. Griffin, N. Dudeck, R. Moro, L. Ma, W.A. De Heer, Ultrahigh-mobility
semiconducting epitaxial graphene on silicon carbide, Nature 625 (2024) 60–65,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06811-0.
[41] K. Hjelt, H. Döscher, The commercialization of graphene electronics, Nature
Electronics 7 (2024) 844–846, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-024-01270-5.
[42] S. Wu, X. Wang, Z. Li, S. Zhang, F. Xing, Recent advances in the fabrication and
application of graphene microfluidic sensors, Micromachines 11 (2020) 1059.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China
(No. 2022YFB4700700), Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Grant No.
3252005), Guangdong Provincial Engineering Technology Research
Center for Materials for Advanced MEMS Sensor Chip
(No.2022GCZX005), the Young Talents Plan of Beihang University (No.
YWF-23-L-1210), State Key Laboratory of Robotics and System (HIT)
(No. SKLRS-2025-KF-06 and SKLRS-2023-KF-03), National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 52305606), Taishan Scholars Project
of Shandong Province (No. tsqn202306028), Shandong Provincial Nat­
ural Science Foundation (No. ZR2023QE187), Natural Science Foun­
dation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20230254), Qilu Young Scholars
Program of Shandong University, the University-enterprise cooperation
research and development project of SZTU (No. 20221061030010 and
20221064010022), MEMS Technology Innovation and Application
Joint Laboratory (SZTU-CSL) (No. 20241064010058) and Shenzhen
University Stability Support Project (20220718173849001).
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1] M.R. Sharma, R.L. Schilsky, New standards and a predictive biomarker for
adjuvant therapy, Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 8 (2011) 70–72, https://doi.org/
10.1038/nrclinonc.2010.219.
[2] A.H. Fox, M. Alexander, J.A. Forcucci, G.A. Silvestri, Biomarker testing for
guiding precision medicine for patients with non-small cell lung cancer, Chest
(2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2024.08.006.
[3] J. Wu, H. Liu, W. Chen, B. Ma, H. Ju, Device integration of electrochemical
biosensors, Nature Reviews Bioengineering 1 (2023) 346–360, https://doi.org/
10.1038/s44222-023-00032-w.
[4] J. Peña-Bahamonde, H.N. Nguyen, S.K. Fanourakis, D.F. Rodrigues, Recent
advances in graphene-based biosensor technology with applications in life
sciences, J. Nanobiotechnol. 16 (2018) 75, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-0180400-z.
[5] M.L. Verma, Sukriti, B.S. Dhanya, R. Saini, A. Das, R.S. Varma, Synthesis and
application of graphene-based sensors in biology: a review, Environ. Chem. Lett.
20 (2022) 2189–2212, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-022-01404-1.
[6] M.J. Hart, S.J. Torres, S.A. Mcnaughton, C.M. Milte, Dietary patterns and
associations with biomarkers of inflammation in adults: a systematic review of
observational studies, Nutr. J. 20 (2021) 24, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12937021-00674-9.
[7] A. Tripathi, J. Bonilla-Cruz, Review on healthcare biosensing nanomaterials, ACS
Appl. Nano Mater. 6 (2023) 5042–5074, https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsanm.3c00941.
[8] S.U. Nanayakkara, J. Van De Lagemaat, J.M. Luther, Scanning probe
characterization of heterostructured colloidal nanomaterials, Chem. Rev. 115
(2015) 8157–8181, https://doi.org/10.1021/cr500280t.
[9] X. Cao, Z. Yin, H. Zhang, Three-dimensional graphene materials: preparation,
structures and application in supercapacitors, Energy Environ. Sci. 7 (2014)
1850–1865, https://doi.org/10.1039/C4EE00050A.
[10] S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O.V. Yazyev, A. Kis, 2D transition metal
dichalcogenides, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2 (2017) 17033, https://doi.org/10.1038/
natrevmats.2017.33.
[11] X. Ge, Z. Xia, S. Guo, Recent advances on black phosphorus for biomedicine and
biosensing, Adv. Funct. Mater. 29 (2019) 1900318, https://doi.org/10.1002/
adfm.201900318.
[12] D. Mohanapriya, J. Satija, S. Senthilkumar, V. Kumar Ponnusamy, K. Thenmozhi,
Design and engineering of 2D MXenes for point-of-care electrochemical detection
of bioactive analytes and environmental pollutants, Coord. Chem. Rev. 507
(2024) 215746, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2024.215746.

20

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

[43] W. Ahmad, Z. Ullah, N.I. Sonil, K. Khan, Introduction, production,
characterization and applications of defects in graphene, J. Mater. Sci. Mater.
Electron. 32 (2021) 19991–20030.
[44] A.I. Inozemtseva, A.V. Sergeev, K.S. Napolskii, S.E. Kushnir, V. Belov, D.M. Itkis,
D.Y. Usachov, L.V. Yashina, Graphene electrochemistry: ‘Adiabaticity’ of electron
transfer, Electrochim. Acta 427 (2022) 140901, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2022.140901.
[45] Z. Zhang, H. Zhu, W. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Lu, K. Xu, Y. Liu, V. Saetang, A review of
laser-induced graphene: from experimental and theoretical fabrication processes
to emerging applications, Carbon 214 (2023) 118356, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbon.2023.118356.
[46] C. Senger, X. Fan, J.N. Pagaduan, X. Zhang, J. Ping, R. Katsumata, Defect healing
in graphene via rapid thermal annealing with polymeric “nanobandage”, Small
19 (2023) 2206295 https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202206295.
[47] Y. Yan, W.I. Shin, H. Chen, S.-M. Lee, S. Manickam, S. Hanson, H. Zhao, E. Lester,
T. Wu, C.H. Pang, A recent trend: application of graphene in catalysis, Carbon
Lett. 31 (2021) 177–199, https://doi.org/10.1007/s42823-020-00200-7.
[48] D. Li, W. Zhang, X. Yu, Z. Wang, Z. Su, G. Wei, When biomolecules meet
graphene: from molecular level interactions to material design and applications,
Nanoscale 8 (2016) 19491–19509, https://doi.org/10.1039/C6NR07249F.
[49] H. Fu, K.A. Gray, Graphene-encapsulated nanocomposites: synthesis,
environmental applications, and future prospects, Sci. Total Environ. 955 (2024)
176753, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.176753.
[50] K. Kim, S. Coh, C. Kisielowski, M.F. Crommie, S.G. Louie, M.L. Cohen, A. Zettl,
Atomically perfect torn graphene edges and their reversible reconstruction, Nat.
Commun. 4 (2013) 2723, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms3723.
[51] O. Akhavan, E. Ghaderi, Toxicity of graphene and graphene oxide nanowalls
against bacteria, ACS Nano 4 (2010) 5731–5736, https://doi.org/10.1021/
nn101390x.
[52] S. Liu, T.H. Zeng, M. Hofmann, E. Burcombe, J. Wei, R. Jiang, J. Kong, Y. Chen,
Antibacterial activity of graphite, graphite oxide, graphene oxide, and reduced
graphene oxide: membrane and oxidative stress, ACS Nano 5 (2011) 6971–6980,
https://doi.org/10.1021/nn202451x.
[53] H. Mohammed, A. Kumar, E. Bekyarova, Y. Al-Hadeethi, X. Zhang, M. Chen, M.
S. Ansari, A. Cochis, L. Rimondini, Antimicrobial mechanisms and effectiveness of
graphene and graphene-functionalized biomaterials. A scope review, Front.
Bioeng. Biotechnol. 8 (2020), https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2020.00465.
[54] A.D. Sontakke, S. Tiwari, M.K. Purkait, A comprehensive review on graphene
oxide-based nanocarriers: synthesis, functionalization and biomedical
applications, FlatChem 38 (2023) 100484, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
flatc.2023.100484.
[55] Y. Tang, H. Xu, X. Wang, S. Dong, L. Guo, S. Zhang, X. Yang, C. Liu, X. Jiang,
M. Kan, S. Wu, J. Zhang, C. Xu, Advances in preparation and application of
antibacterial hydrogels, J. Nanobiotechnol. 21 (2023) 300, https://doi.org/
10.1186/s12951-023-02025-8.
[56] P. Kumar, P. Huo, R. Zhang, B. Liu, Antibacterial properties of graphene-based
nanomaterials, Nanomaterials 9 (2019) 737.
[57] Y. Alapan, K. Icoz, U.A. Gurkan, Micro- and nanodevices integrated with
biomolecular probes, Biotechnol. Adv. 33 (2015) 1727–1743, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biotechadv.2015.09.001.
[58] Z. Chen, Y. Yang, X. Cui, L. Chai, H. Liu, Y. Pan, Y. Zhang, Y. Xie, T. Le, Process,
advances, and perspectives of graphene oxide-SELEX for the development of
aptamer molecular probes: a comprehensive review, Anal. Chim. Acta 1320
(2024) 343004, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2024.343004.
[59] B. Sequeira-Antunes, H.A. Ferreira, Nucleic acid aptamer-based biosensors: a
review, Biomedicines 11 (2023) 3201.
[60] Z. Wang, Z. Hao, S. Yu, C.G. De Moraes, L.H. Suh, X. Zhao, Q. Lin, An ultraflexible
and stretchable aptameric graphene nanosensor for biomarker detection and
monitoring, Adv. Funct. Mater. 29 (2019) 1905202, https://doi.org/10.1002/
adfm.201905202.
[61] M. Domsicova, J. Korcekova, A. Poturnayova, A. Breier, New insights into
aptamers: an alternative to antibodies in the detection of molecular biomarkers,
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 25 (2024) 6833.
[62] Z. Hao, Y. Pan, C. Huang, Z. Wang, Q. Lin, X. Zhao, S. Liu, Modulating the linker
immobilization density on aptameric graphene field effect transistors using an
electric field, ACS Sens. 5 (2020) 2503–2513, https://doi.org/10.1021/
acssensors.0c00752.
[63] M.I.J. Raybould, C. Marks, K. Krawczyk, B. Taddese, J. Nowak, A.P. Lewis,
A. Bujotzek, J. Shi, C.M. Deane, Five computational developability guidelines for
therapeutic antibody profiling, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 116 (2019) 4025–4030,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1810576116.
[64] M. Jarczewska, E. Malinowska, The application of antibody–aptamer hybrid
biosensors in clinical diagnostics and environmental analysis, Anal. Methods 12
(2020) 3183–3199, https://doi.org/10.1039/D0AY00678E.
[65] H. Fang, B. Peng, S.Y. Ong, Q. Wu, L. Li, S.Q. Yao, Recent advances in activitybased probes (ABPs) and affinity-based probes (AfBPs) for profiling of enzymes,
Chem. Sci. 12 (2021) 8288–8310, https://doi.org/10.1039/D1SC01359A.
[66] H.H. Jung, H. Lee, J. Yea, K.I. Jang, Wearable Electrochemical Sensors for RealTime Monitoring in Diabetes Mellitus and Associated Complications, OAE
Publishing Inc., 2024.
[67] L. Li, S. Xu, H. Yan, X. Li, H.S. Yazd, X. Li, T. Huang, C. Cui, J. Jiang, W. Tan,
Nucleic acid aptamers for molecular diagnostics and therapeutics: advances and
perspectives, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60 (2021) 2221–2231, https://doi.org/
10.1002/anie.202003563.

[68] Y. He, M. Garnica, F. Bischoff, J. Ducke, M.-L. Bocquet, M. Batzill, W. Auwärter, J.
V. Barth, Fusing tetrapyrroles to graphene edges by surface-assisted covalent
coupling, Nat. Chem. 9 (2017) 33–38, https://doi.org/10.1038/nchem.2600.
[69] M. Liu, Y. Duan, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, Diazonium functionalization of graphene
nanosheets and impact response of aniline modified graphene/bismaleimide
nanocomposites, Mater. Des. 53 (2014) 466–474, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matdes.2013.07.027.
[70] H.J. Sim, P. Xiao, H. Lu, Pyrenebutyric acid-assisted room-temperature synthesis
of large-size monolayer graphene oxide with high mechanical strength, Carbon
185 (2021) 224–233, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2021.09.013.
[71] A. Béraud, M. Sauvage, C.M. Bazán, M. Tie, A. Bencherif, D. Bouilly, Graphene
field-effect transistors as bioanalytical sensors: design, operation and
performance, Analyst 146 (2021) 403–428, https://doi.org/10.1039/
D0AN01661F.
[72] J.W. Kim, Y.-H. Jang, G.M. Ku, S. Kim, E. Lee, K. Cho, K.-I. Lim, W.H. Lee, Liquid
coplanar-gate organic/graphene hybrid electronics for label-free detection of
single and double-stranded DNA molecules, Org. Electron. 62 (2018) 163–167,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgel.2018.07.032.
[73] V. Mishyn, A. Hugo, T. Rodrigues, P. Aspermair, H. Happy, L. Marques, C. Hurot,
R. Othmen, V. Bouchiat, R. Boukherroub, W. Knoll, S. Szunerits, The holy grail of
pyrene-based surface ligands on the sensitivity of graphene-based field effect
transistors, Sensors & Diagnostics 1 (2022) 235–244, https://doi.org/10.1039/
D1SD00036E.
[74] I. Shown, A. Ganguly, Non-covalent functionalization of CVD-grown graphene
with Au nanoparticles for electrochemical sensing application, Journal of
Nanostructure in Chemistry 6 (2016) 281–288, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40097016-0201-6.
[75] M. Garg, N. Pamme, Strategies to remove templates from molecularly imprinted
polymer (MIP) for biosensors, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 170 (2024) 117437,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2023.117437.
[76] K. Phonklam, R. Wannapob, W. Sriwimol, P. Thavarungkul, T. Phairatana,
A novel molecularly imprinted polymer PMB/MWCNTs sensor for highlysensitive cardiac troponin T detection, Sensor. Actuator. B Chem. 308 (2020)
127630, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2019.127630.
[77] Y. Li, C. Guan, C. Liu, Z. Li, G. Han, Disease diagnosis and application analysis of
molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) in saliva detection, Talanta 269 (2024)
125394, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.talanta.2023.125394.
[78] H. Zhang, Z. Zhu, Y. Wang, Z. Fei, J. Cao, Changing the activities and structures of
bovine serum albumin bound to graphene oxide, Appl. Surf. Sci. 427 (2018)
1019–1029, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.08.130.
[79] L. Xu, X. Yang, Molecular dynamics simulation of adsorption of
pyrene–polyethylene glycol onto graphene, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 418 (2014)
66–73, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2013.12.005.
[80] H.T. Larijani, M. Jahanshahi, M.D. Ganji, M.H. Kiani, Computational studies on
the interactions of glycine amino acid with graphene, h-BN and h-SiC monolayers,
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 19 (2017) 1896–1908, https://doi.org/10.1039/
C6CP06672K.
[81] M. Bhandari, N. Kumari, Surface functionalization reactions of graphene-based
nanostructure and their practical application [M]//E.W. Wambu. Chemistry of
Graphene - Synthesis, Reactivity, Applications and Toxicities, IntechOpen, Rijeka,
2024.
[82] G. Feng, H. Zhang, J. Chen, Z. Fang, X. Hu, Modified graphene oxide (GO)
embedded in nanofiltration membranes with high flux and anti-fouling for
enhanced surface water purification, J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 13 (2025) 115172,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2024.115172.
[83] K. Sankar, U. Kuzmanović, S.E. Schaus, J.E. Galagan, M.W. Grinstaff, Strategy,
design, and fabrication of electrochemical biosensors: a Tutorial, ACS Sens. 9
(2024) 2254–2274, https://doi.org/10.1021/acssensors.4c00043.
[84] A.R. Harris, D.B. Grayden, S.E. John, Electrochemistry in a two- or threeelectrode configuration to understand monopolar or bipolar configurations of
platinum bionic implants, Micromachines 14 (2023) 722.
[85] Z.O. Uygun, H.D. Ertuğrul Uygun, A short footnote: circuit design for faradaic
impedimetric sensors and biosensors, Sensor. Actuator. B Chem. 202 (2014)
448–453, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2014.05.029.
[86] A.J. Bard, L.R. Faulkner, H.S. White, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and
Applications, John Wiley & Sons, 2022.
[87] A.C. Lazanas, M.I. Prodromidis, Electrochemical impedance Spectroscopy─A
Tutorial, ACS Measurement Science Au 3 (2023) 162–193, https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.2c00070.
[88] B.J. Venton, D.J. Discenza, Chapter 3 - Voltammetry [M]//B. Patel,
Electrochemistry for Bioanalysis, Elsevier, 2020, pp. 27–50.
[89] X. Li, Z.-Y. Zhang, F. Li, Flexible electrochemical sensors based on nanomaterials:
Constructions, applications and prospects, Chem. Eng. J. (2024) 158101, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2024.158101.
[90] H. Shamkhalichenar, J.-W. Choi, Review—non-enzymatic hydrogen peroxide
electrochemical sensors based on reduced graphene oxide, J. Electrochem. Soc.
167 (2020) 037531, https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/ab644a.
[91] M. Pumera, A. Ambrosi, A. Bonanni, E.L.K. Chng, H.L. Poh, Graphene for
electrochemical sensing and biosensing, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 29 (2010)
954–965, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2010.05.011.
[92] R. Campos, J. Borme, J.R. Guerreiro, G. Machado Jr., M.F. Cerqueira, D.
Y. Petrovykh, P. Alpuim, Attomolar label-free detection of DNA hybridization
with electrolyte-gated graphene field-effect transistors, ACS Sens. 4 (2019)
286–293, https://doi.org/10.1021/acssensors.8b00344.
[93] T.T.-H. Nguyen, C.M. Nguyen, M.A. Huynh, H.H. Vu, T.-K. Nguyen, N.-T. Nguyen,
Field effect transistor based wearable biosensors for healthcare monitoring,

21

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

J. Nanobiotechnol. 21 (2023) 411, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-023-021531.
[94] L. Anzi, A. Tuktamyshev, A. Fedorov, A. Zurutuza, S. Sanguinetti, R. Sordan,
Controlling the threshold voltage of a semiconductor field-effect transistor by
gating its graphene gate, npj 2D Materials and Applications 6 (2022) 28, https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41699-022-00302-y.
[95] M. Sun, C. Zhang, S. Lu, S. Mahmood, J. Wang, C. Sun, J. Pang, L. Han, H. Liu,
Recent advances in graphene field-effect transistor toward biological detection,
Adv. Funct. Mater. 34 (2024) 2405471, https://doi.org/10.1002/
adfm.202405471.
[96] F. Torricelli, D.Z. Adrahtas, Z. Bao, M. Berggren, F. Biscarini, A. Bonfiglio, C.
A. Bortolotti, C.D. Frisbie, E. Macchia, G.G. Malliaras, I. Mcculloch, M. Moser, T.Q. Nguyen, R.M. Owens, A. Salleo, A. Spanu, L. Torsi, Electrolyte-gated
transistors for enhanced performance bioelectronics, Nature Reviews Methods
Primers 1 (2021) 66, https://doi.org/10.1038/s43586-021-00065-8.
[97] W. Fu, L. Jiang, E.P. Van Geest, L.M.C. Lima, G.F. Schneider, Sensing at the
surface of graphene field-effect transistors, Adv. Mater. 29 (2017) 1603610,
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201603610.
[98] S. Latil, L. Henrard, Charge carriers in few-layer graphene films, Phys. Rev. Lett.
97 (2006) 036803, https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.97.036803.
[99] N.a.M. Tran, I. Fakih, O. Durnan, A. Hu, A.M. Aygar, I. Napal, A. Centeno,
A. Zurutuza, B. Reulet, T. Szkopek, Graphene field effect transistor scaling for
ultra-low-noise sensors, Nanotechnology 32 (2021) 045502, https://doi.org/
10.1088/1361-6528/abc0c8.
[100] T. Hayasaka, Y. Kubota, Y. Liu, L. Lin, The influences of temperature, humidity,
and O2 on electrical properties of graphene FETs, Sensor. Actuator. B Chem. 285
(2019) 116–122, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2019.01.037.
[101] C. Andronescu, W. Schuhmann, Graphene-based field effect transistors as
biosensors, Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 3 (2017) 11–17, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
coelec.2017.03.002.
[102] Y. Li, C. Wang, Y. Zhu, X. Zhou, Y. Xiang, M. He, S. Zeng, Fully integrated
graphene electronic biosensor for label-free detection of lead (II) ion based on Gquadruplex structure-switching, Biosens. Bioelectron. 89 (2017) 758–763,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2016.10.061.
[103] G. Song, M. Ranjbar, R.A. Kiehl, Operation of graphene magnetic field sensors
near the charge neutrality point, Commun. Phys. 2 (2019) 65, https://doi.org/
10.1038/s42005-019-0161-5.
[104] M.H. Fuad, M.F. Nayan, M.A. Raihan, R. Yeassin, R.R. Mahmud, Performance
analysis of graphene field effect transistor at nanoscale regime, e-Prime advances in Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Energy 9 (2024) 100679,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prime.2024.100679.
[105] G. Saltzgaber, P.M. Wojcik, T. Sharf, M.R. Leyden, J.L. Wardini, C.A. Heist, A.
A. Adenuga, V.T. Remcho, E.D. Minot, Scalable graphene field-effect sensors for
specific protein detection, Nanotechnology 24 (2013) 355502, https://doi.org/
10.1088/0957-4484/24/35/355502.
[106] A. Ahmad, M. Imran, H. Ahsan, Biomarkers as biomedical bioindicators:
approaches and techniques for the detection, analysis, and validation of novel
biomarkers of diseases, Pharmaceutics 15 (2023) 1630.
[107] C. Dai, D. Kong, C. Chen, Y. Liu, D. Wei, Graphene transistors for in vitro
detection of health biomarkers, Adv. Funct. Mater. 33 (2023) 2301948, https://
doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202301948.
[108] C. Huang, W. Yang, H. Wang, S. Huang, S. Gao, D. Li, J. Liu, S. Hou, W. Feng,
Z. Wang, F. Li, Z. Hao, X. Zhao, P. Hu, Y. Pan, Flexible/regenerative nanosensor
with automatic sweat collection for cytokine storm biomarker detection, ACS
Nano 18 (2024) 21198–21210, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c04456.
[109] G. Liu, C. Jiang, X. Lin, Y. Yang, Point-of-care detection of cytokines in cytokine
storm management and beyond: significance and challenges, VIEW 2 (2021)
20210003, https://doi.org/10.1002/VIW.20210003.
[110] X.-D. Tang, T.-T. Ji, J.-R. Dong, H. Feng, F.-Q. Chen, X. Chen, H.-Y. Zhao, D.K. Chen, W.-T. Ma, Pathogenesis and treatment of cytokine storm induced by
infectious diseases, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22 (2021) 13009.
[111] P. Chauhan, A. Nair, A. Patidar, J. Dandapat, A. Sarkar, B. Saha, A primer on
cytokines, Cytokine 145 (2021) 155458, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cyto.2021.155458.
[112] Z. Wang, Z. Hao, S. Yu, C. Huang, Y. Pan, X. Zhao, A wearable and deformable
graphene-based affinity nanosensor for monitoring of cytokines in biofluids,
Nanomaterials 10 (2020) 1503.
[113] C.K. Dixit, S.K. Vashist, B.D. Maccraith, R. O’kennedy, Multisubstrate-compatible
ELISA procedures for rapid and high-sensitivity immunoassays, Nat. Protoc. 6
(2011) 439–445, https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2011.304.
[114] Y. Park, B. Ryu, B.-R. Oh, Y. Song, X. Liang, K. Kurabayashi, Biotunable
nanoplasmonic filter on few-layer MoS2 for rapid and highly sensitive cytokine
optoelectronic immunosensing, ACS Nano 11 (2017) 5697–5705, https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsnano.7b01162.
[115] K.E. Laliberte, P. Scott, N.I. Khan, M.S. Mahmud, E. Song, A wearable graphene
transistor-based biosensor for monitoring IL-6 biomarker, Microelectron. Eng.
262 (2022) 111835, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mee.2022.111835.
[116] E. Fernandes, P.D. Cabral, R. Campos, G. Machado, M.F. Cerqueira, C. Sousa, P.
P. Freitas, J. Borme, D.Y. Petrovykh, P. Alpuim, Functionalization of single-layer
graphene for immunoassays, Appl. Surf. Sci. 480 (2019) 709–716, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2019.03.004.
[117] Z. Hao, Z. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhu, X. Wang, C.G. De Moraes, Y. Pan, X. Zhao, Q. Lin,
Measurement of cytokine biomarkers using an aptamer-based affinity graphene
nanosensor on a flexible substrate toward wearable applications, Nanoscale 10
(2018) 21681–21688, https://doi.org/10.1039/C8NR04315A.

[118] Z. Wang, W. Dai, S. Yu, Z. Hao, R. Pei, C.G. De Moraes, L.H. Suh, X. Zhao, Q. Lin,
Towards detection of biomarkers in the eye using an aptamer-based graphene
affinity nanobiosensor, Talanta 250 (2022) 123697, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
talanta.2022.123697.
[119] C. Huang, D. Li, J. Liu, S. Hou, W. Yang, H. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Wang, F. Li, Z. Hao,
S. Huang, X. Zhao, P. Hu, Y. Pan, A flexible aptameric graphene field-effect
nanosensor capable of automatic liquid collection/filtering for cytokine storm
biomarker monitoring in undiluted sweat, Adv. Funct. Mater. 34 (2024) 2309447,
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202309447.
[120] S. Balayan, N. Chauhan, W. Rosario, U. Jain, Biosensor development for Creactive protein detection: a review, Applied Surface Science Advances 12 (2022)
100343, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsadv.2022.100343.
[121] Z. Hao, Y. Luo, C. Huang, Z. Wang, G. Song, Y. Pan, X. Zhao, S. Liu, An intelligent
graphene-based biosensing device for cytokine storm syndrome biomarkers
detection in human biofluids, Small 17 (2021) 2101508, https://doi.org/
10.1002/smll.202101508.
[122] J. Heikenfeld, A. Jajack, B. Feldman, S.W. Granger, S. Gaitonde, G. Begtrup, B.
A. Katchman, Accessing analytes in biofluids for peripheral biochemical
monitoring, Nat. Biotechnol. 37 (2019) 407–419, https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41587-019-0040-3.
[123] J. Tu, J. Min, Y. Song, C. Xu, J. Li, J. Moore, J. Hanson, E. Hu, T. Parimon, T.Y. Wang, E. Davoodi, T.-F. Chou, P. Chen, J.J. Hsu, H.B. Rossiter, W. Gao,
A wireless patch for the monitoring of C-reactive protein in sweat, Nat. Biomed.
Eng. 7 (2023) 1293–1306, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01059-5.
[124] S. Viswanathan, T.N. Narayanan, K. Aran, K.D. Fink, J. Paredes, P.M. Ajayan,
S. Filipek, P. Miszta, H.C. Tekin, F. Inci, U. Demirci, P. Li, K.I. Bolotin,
D. Liepmann, V. Renugopalakrishanan, Graphene–protein field effect biosensors:
glucose sensing, Mater. Today 18 (2015) 513–522, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mattod.2015.04.003.
[125] D. Holmes, Sweat-sensing patch for glucose monitoring and drug delivery, Nat.
Rev. Endocrinol. 12 (2016) 247, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2016.56.
[126] M. Bariya, H.Y.Y. Nyein, A. Javey, Wearable sweat sensors, Nature Electronics 1
(2018) 160–171, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-018-0043-y.
[127] X. Ji, X. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Y. Si, W. Qian, H. Fu, Z. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Jin, Z. Yang,
D. He, Scalable fabrication of graphene-assembled multifunctional electrode with
efficient electrochemical detection of dopamine and glucose, Nano Res. 16 (2023)
6361–6368, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12274-023-5459-7.
[128] M. Govindaraj, A. Srivastava, M.K. Muthukumaran, P.-C. Tsai, Y.-C. Lin, B.
K. Raja, J. Rajendran, V.K. Ponnusamy, J. Arockia Selvi, Current advancements
and prospects of enzymatic and non-enzymatic electrochemical glucose sensors,
Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 253 (2023) 126680, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2023.126680.
[129] Y. Hao, M. Fang, C. Xu, Z. Ying, H. Wang, R. Zhang, H.-M. Cheng, Y. Zeng,
A graphene-laminated electrode with high glucose oxidase loading for highlysensitive glucose detection, J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 66 (2021) 57–63, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmst.2020.04.070.
[130] X. You, J.J. Pak, Graphene-based field effect transistor enzymatic glucose
biosensor using silk protein for enzyme immobilization and device substrate,
Sensor. Actuator. B Chem. 202 (2014) 1357–1365, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
snb.2014.04.079.
[131] N. Gao, R. Zhou, B. Tu, T. Tao, Y. Song, Z. Cai, H. He, G. Chang, Y. Wu, Y. He,
Graphene electrochemical transistor incorporated with gel electrolyte for
wearable and non-invasive glucose monitoring, Anal. Chim. Acta 1239 (2023)
340719, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2022.340719.
[132] Y. Yao, J. Chen, Y. Guo, T. Lv, Z. Chen, N. Li, S. Cao, B. Chen, T. Chen, Integration
of interstitial fluid extraction and glucose detection in one device for wearable
non-invasive blood glucose sensors, Biosens. Bioelectron. 179 (2021) 113078,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2021.113078.
[133] X. Li, T. Li, B. Liu, N. Hu, T. Hu, Z. Ni, Boosting the performance of an
iontophoretic biosensing system with a graphene aerogel and Prussian blue for
highly sensitive and noninvasive glucose monitoring, Analyst 148 (2023)
3184–3192, https://doi.org/10.1039/D3AN00212H.
[134] A.A. Karyakin, E.E. Karyakina, L. Gorton, On the mechanism of H2O2 reduction at
Prussian Blue modified electrodes, Electrochem. Commun. 1 (1999) 78–82.
[135] J. Zhao, C. Zheng, J. Gao, J. Gui, L. Deng, Y. Wang, R. Xu, Co3O4 nanoparticles
embedded in laser-induced graphene for a flexible and highly sensitive enzymefree glucose biosensor, Sensor. Actuator. B Chem. 347 (2021) 130653, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2021.130653.
[136] Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, C. Qiao, Y. Liu, C. Wang, X. Zeng, J. Hou, D. Huo, C. Hou,
Synergistic enhancement of wearable biosensor through Pt single-atom catalyst
for sweat analysis, Biosens. Bioelectron. 258 (2024) 116354, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bios.2024.116354.
[137] J.K. Nicholson, I.D. Wilson, Understanding ’global’ systems biology:
metabonomics and the continuum of metabolism, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 2
(2003) 668–676, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd1157.
[138] R. Haas, D. Cucchi, J. Smith, V. Pucino, C.E. Macdougall, C. Mauro, Intermediates
of metabolism: from bystanders to signalling molecules, Trends Biochem. Sci. 41
(2016) 460–471, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibs.2016.02.003.
[139] G. Ragab, M. Elshahaly, T. Bardin, Gout: an old disease in new perspective – a
review, J. Adv. Res. 8 (2017) 495–511, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jare.2017.04.008.
[140] H. Rho, A.R. Terry, C. Chronis, N. Hay, Hexokinase 2-mediated gene expression
via histone lactylation is required for hepatic stellate cell activation and liver
fibrosis, Cell Metab. 35 (2023), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2023.06.013,
1406-23.e8.

22

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

[141] J.D. Rabinowitz, S. Enerbäck, Lactate: the ugly duckling of energy metabolism,
Nat. Metab. 2 (2020) 566–571, https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-020-0243-4.
[142] M. Sharifuzzaman, A. Chhetry, M.A. Zahed, S.H. Yoon, C.I. Park, S. Zhang,
S. Chandra Barman, S. Sharma, H. Yoon, J.Y. Park, Smart bandage with integrated
multifunctional sensors based on MXene-functionalized porous graphene scaffold
for chronic wound care management, Biosens. Bioelectron. 169 (2020) 112637,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2020.112637.
[143] L. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Li, C. Cui, Z. Zhou, L. Wen, Surface engineering of laserinduced graphene enables long-term monitoring of on-body uric acid and pH
simultaneously, Nano Lett. 22 (2022) 5451–5458, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
nanolett.2c01500.
[144] P. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, D. Huo, J. Hou, C. Hou, Wearable electrochemical patch
based on iron nano-catalysts incorporated laser-induced graphene for sweat
metabolites detection, Biosens. Bioelectron. 249 (2024) 116012, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bios.2024.116012.
[145] D. Jiang, C. Xu, Q. Zhang, Y. Ye, Y. Cai, K. Li, Y. Li, X. Huang, Y. Wang, In-situ
preparation of lactate-sensing membrane for the noninvasive and wearable
analysis of sweat, Biosens. Bioelectron. 210 (2022) 114303, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bios.2022.114303.
[146] Z. Hao, X. Fang, Z. Wang, C. Huang, F. Li, Y. Luo, Y. Ying, S. Ma, Y. Jia, X. Wang,
Y. Pan, Intelligent wearable graphene nano-electronics with switchable surface
wettability capabilities for autonomous sweat enrichment-purification-analysis,
Adv. Funct. Mater. 34 (2024) 2400947, https://doi.org/10.1002/
adfm.202400947.
[147] N. Haroon, K.J. Stine, Electrochemical detection of hormones using
nanostructured electrodes, Coatings 13 (2023) 2040.
[148] E. Knezevic, K. Nenic, V. Milanovic, N.N. Knezevic, The role of cortisol in chronic
stress, neurodegenerative diseases, and psychological disorders, Cells 12 (2023)
2726.
[149] H. Yaribeygi, Y. Panahi, H. Sahraei, T.P. Johnston, A. Sahebkar, The impact of
stress on body function: a review, Excli j 16 (2017) 1057–1072, https://doi.org/
10.17179/excli2017-480.
[150] M. Garg, H. Guo, E. Maclam, E. Zhanov, S. Samudrala, A. Pavlov, M.S. Rahman,
M. Namkoong, J.P. Moreno, L. Tian, Molecularly imprinted wearable sensor with
paper microfluidics for real-time sweat biomarker analysis, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 16 (2024) 46113–46122, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.4c10033.
[151] J.S. Nah, S.C. Barman, M.A. Zahed, M. Sharifuzzaman, H. Yoon, C. Park, S. Yoon,
S. Zhang, J.Y. Park, A wearable microfluidics-integrated impedimetric
immunosensor based on Ti3C2Tx MXene incorporated laser-burned graphene for
noninvasive sweat cortisol detection, Sensor. Actuator. B Chem. 329 (2021)
129206, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2020.129206.
[152] A. Karim, M. Yasser, A. Ahmad, H. Natsir, A. Wahid Wahab, S. Fauziah, P. Taba,
I. Pratama, Rosalin, A. Rajab, A. Nur Fitriani Abubakar, T. Widayati Putri,
R. Munadi, A. Fudhail Majid, A. Nur, Fadliah, A. Rifai, M. Syahrir, A review:
progress and trend advantage of dopamine electrochemical sensor, J. Electroanal.
Chem. 959 (2024) 118157, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelechem.2024.118157.
[153] G. Xu, Z.A. Jarjes, V. Desprez, P.A. Kilmartin, J. Travas-Sejdic, Sensitive,
selective, disposable electrochemical dopamine sensor based on PEDOT-modified
laser scribed graphene, Biosens. Bioelectron. 107 (2018) 184–191, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bios.2018.02.031.
[154] W. Li, Y. Li, Z. Song, Y.-X. Wang, W. Hu, PEDOT-based stretchable optoelectronic
materials and devices for bioelectronic interfaces, Chem. Soc. Rev. 53 (2024)
10575–10603, https://doi.org/10.1039/D4CS00541D.
[155] H.-U. Kim, A. Koyappayil, H. Seok, K. Aydin, C. Kim, K.-Y. Park, N. Jeon, W.
S. Kang, M.-H. Lee, T. Kim, Concurrent and selective determination of dopamine
and serotonin with flexible WS2/graphene/polyimide electrode using cold
plasma, Small 17 (2021) 2102757, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202102757.
[156] H. Li, H. Gong, T.H. Wong, J. Zhou, Y. Wang, L. Lin, Y. Dou, H. Jia, X. Huang,
Z. Gao, R. Shi, Y. Huang, Z. Chen, W. Park, J.Y. Li, H. Chu, S. Jia, H. Wu, M. Wu,
Y. Liu, D. Li, J. Li, G. Xu, T. Chang, B. Zhang, Y. Gao, J. Su, H. Bai, J. Hu, C.K. Yiu,
C. Xu, W. Hu, J. Huang, L. Chang, X. Yu, Wireless, battery-free, multifunctional
integrated bioelectronics for respiratory pathogens monitoring and severity
evaluation, Nat. Commun. 14 (2023) 7539, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467023-43189-z.
[157] C. Fiala, E.P. Diamandis, New approaches for detecting cancer with circulating
cell-free DNA, BMC Med. 17 (2019) 159, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-0191400-z.
[158] M. Cisneros-Villanueva, L. Hidalgo-Pérez, M. Rios-Romero, A. Cedro-Tanda, C.
A. Ruiz-Villavicencio, K. Page, R. Hastings, D. Fernandez-Garcia, R. Allsopp, M.
A. Fonseca-Montaño, S. Jimenez-Morales, V. Padilla-Palma, J.A. Shaw,
A. Hidalgo-Miranda, Cell-free DNA analysis in current cancer clinical trials: a
review, Br. J. Cancer 126 (2022) 391–400, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-02101696-0.
[159] B. Yang, H. Wang, J. Kong, X. Fang, Long-term monitoring of ultratrace nucleic
acids using tetrahedral nanostructure-based NgAgo on wearable microneedles,
Nat. Commun. 15 (2024) 1936, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-46215-w.
[160] B. Yang, J. Kong, X. Fang, Programmable CRISPR-Cas9 microneedle patch for
long-term capture and real-time monitoring of universal cell-free DNA, Nat.
Commun. 13 (2022) 3999, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31740-3.
[161] S.L. Percival, S. Mccarty, J.A. Hunt, E.J. Woods, The effects of pH on wound
healing, biofilms, and antimicrobial efficacy, Wound Repair Regen. 22 (2014)
174–186, https://doi.org/10.1111/wrr.12125.
[162] J.C. Berkmann, A.X. Herrera Martin, A. Ellinghaus, C. Schlundt, H. Schell,
E. Lippens, G.N. Duda, S. Tsitsilonis, K. Schmidt-Bleek, Early pH changes in
musculoskeletal tissues upon injury—aerobic catabolic pathway activity linked to
inter-individual differences in local pH, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 (2020) 2513.

[163] C. Wang, R. Wu, L. Wang, X. Wang, Multifunctional flexible graphene oxide/
bacterial cellulose composite paper platforms for realtime monitoring sweat and
strain in wearable devices, Chem. Eng. J. 481 (2024) 148390, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2023.148390.
[164] F. Li, B. Bhushan, Y. Pan, X. Zhao, Bioinspired superoleophobic/superhydrophilic
functionalized cotton for efficient separation of immiscible oil-water mixtures and
oil-water emulsions, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 548 (2019) 123–130, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jcis.2019.04.031.
[165] F. Li, S. Wang, X. Zhao, L. Shao, Y. Pan, Durable superoleophobic Janus fabric
with oil repellence and anisotropic water-transport integration toward energeticefficient oil–water separation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14 (2022)
37170–37181, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.2c09545.
[166] F. Li, S. Wang, Z. Wang, K. Jiang, X. Zhao, L. Shao, Y. Pan, Fouling-proof cooling
(FP-cool) fabric hybrid with enhanced sweat-elimination and heat-dissipation for
personal thermal regulation, Adv. Funct. Mater. 33 (2023) 2210769, https://doi.
org/10.1002/adfm.202210769.
[167] D.-J. Liaw, K.-L. Wang, Y.-C. Huang, K.-R. Lee, J.-Y. Lai, C.-S. Ha, Advanced
polyimide materials: syntheses, physical properties and applications, Prog.
Polym. Sci. 37 (2012) 907–974, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
progpolymsci.2012.02.005.
[168] Y.-S. Hsiao, C.-W. Chang-Jian, T.-Y. Huang, Y.-L. Chen, C.-W. Huang, J.-H. Huang,
N.-J. Wu, S.-C. Hsu, C.-P. Chen, Lightweight flexible polyimide-derived laserinduced graphenes for high-performance thermal management applications,
Chem. Eng. J. 451 (2023) 138656, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2022.138656.
[169] S. Bai, Y. Tang, L. Lin, L. Ruan, R. Song, H. Chen, Y. Du, H. Lin, Y. Shan, Y. Tang,
Investigation of micro/nano formation mechanism of porous graphene induced
by CO2 laser processing on polyimide film, J. Manuf. Process. 84 (2022) 555–564,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2022.10.037.
[170] G. Ren, H. Fan, L. Zhang, S. He, C. Zhu, K. Gao, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, X. Kang,
Y. Song, A laser-induced graphene-based flexible and all-carbon organic
electrochemical transistor, J. Mater. Chem. C 11 (2023) 4916–4928.
[171] Y. Yang, Y. Song, X. Bo, J. Min, O.S. Pak, L. Zhu, M. Wang, J. Tu, A. Kogan,
H. Zhang, T.K. Hsiai, Z. Li, W. Gao, A laser-engraved wearable sensor for sensitive
detection of uric acid and tyrosine in sweat, Nat. Biotechnol. 38 (2020) 217–224,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-019-0321-x.
[172] F. Lorestani, X. Zhang, A.M. Abdullah, X. Xin, Y. Liu, M.M. Rahman, M.a.
S. Biswas, B. Li, A. Dutta, Z. Niu, S. Das, S. Barai, K. Wang, H. Cheng, A highly
sensitive and long-term stable wearable patch for continuous analysis of
biomarkers in sweat, Adv. Funct. Mater. 33 (2023) 2306117, https://doi.org/
10.1002/adfm.202306117.
[173] M. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Min, Y. Song, J. Tu, D. Mukasa, C. Ye, C. Xu, N. Heflin, J.
S. Mccune, T.K. Hsiai, Z. Li, W. Gao, A wearable electrochemical biosensor for the
monitoring of metabolites and nutrients, Nat. Biomed. Eng. 6 (2022) 1225–1235,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-022-00916-z.
[174] Z. Wang, Z. Hao, X. Wang, C. Huang, Q. Lin, X. Zhao, Y. Pan, A flexible and
regenerative aptameric graphene–nafion biosensor for cytokine storm biomarker
monitoring in undiluted biofluids toward wearable applications, Adv. Funct.
Mater. 31 (2021) 2005958, https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202005958.
[175] C. Huang, Z. Hao, Z. Wang, H. Wang, X. Zhao, Y. Pan, An ultraflexible and
transparent graphene-based wearable sensor for biofluid biomarkers detection,
Advanced Materials Technologies 7 (2022) 2101131, https://doi.org/10.1002/
admt.202101131.
[176] M.S. Mannoor, H. Tao, J.D. Clayton, A. Sengupta, D.L. Kaplan, R.R. Naik,
N. Verma, F.G. Omenetto, M.C. Mcalpine, Graphene-based wireless bacteria
detection on tooth enamel, Nat. Commun. 3 (2012) 763.
[177] X. Zhan, J. Li, Y. Guo, O. Golubnitschaja, Mass spectrometry analysis of human
tear fluid biomarkers specific for ocular and systemic diseases in the context of 3P
medicine, EPMA J. 12 (2021) 449–475, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13167-02100265-y.
[178] S. Hagan, E. Martin, A. Enríquez-De-Salamanca, Tear fluid biomarkers in ocular
and systemic disease: potential use for predictive, preventive and personalised
medicine, EPMA J. 7 (2016) 15, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13167-016-0065-3.
[179] A. Barmada, S.A. Shippy, Tear analysis as the next routine body fluid test, Eye 34
(2020) 1731–1733, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41433-020-0930-0.
[180] M. Golda-Cepa, K. Engvall, M. Hakkarainen, A. Kotarba, Recent progress on
parylene C polymer for biomedical applications: a review, Prog. Org. Coat. 140
(2020) 105493, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.porgcoat.2019.105493.
[181] D.C. Rodger, J.D. Weiland, M.S. Humayun, Y.-C. Tai, Scalable high lead-count
parylene package for retinal prostheses, Sensor. Actuator. B Chem. 117 (2006)
107–114, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2005.11.010.
[182] R. Moreddu, D. Vigolo, A.K. Yetisen, Contact lens technology: from fundamentals
to applications, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 8 (2019) 1900368, https://doi.org/
10.1002/adhm.201900368.
[183] K. Roy, P. Devi, P. Kumar, Magnetic-field induced sustainable electrochemical
energy harvesting and storage devices: recent progress, opportunities, and future
perspectives, Nano Energy 87 (2021) 106119, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
nanoen.2021.106119.
[184] K. Na, H. Ma, J. Park, J. Yeo, J.U. Park, F. Bien, Graphene-based wireless
environmental gas sensor on PET substrate, IEEE Sens. J. 16 (2016) 5003–5009,
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2016.2531121.
[185] J. Park, J. Kim, K. Kim, S.-Y. Kim, W.H. Cheong, K. Park, J.H. Song, G. Namgoong,
J.J. Kim, J. Heo, F. Bien, J.-U. Park, Wearable, wireless gas sensors using highly
stretchable and transparent structures of nanowires and graphene, Nanoscale 8
(2016) 10591–10597, https://doi.org/10.1039/C6NR01468B.
[186] J. Kim, M. Kim, M.-S. Lee, K. Kim, S. Ji, Y.-T. Kim, J. Park, K. Na, K.-H. Bae,
H. Kyun Kim, F. Bien, C. Young Lee, J.-U. Park, Wearable smart sensor systems

23

J. Song et al.

Materials Today Bio 32 (2025) 101667

integrated on soft contact lenses for wireless ocular diagnostics, Nat. Commun. 8
(2017) 14997, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14997.
[187] J. Park, J. Kim, S.-Y. Kim, W.H. Cheong, J. Jang, Y.-G. Park, K. Na, Y.-T. Kim, J.
H. Heo, C.Y. Lee, J.H. Lee, F. Bien, J.-U. Park, Soft, smart contact lenses with
integrations of wireless circuits, glucose sensors, and displays, Sci. Adv. 4 (2018)
eaap9841, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aap9841.
[188] M. Ku, J. Kim, J.-E. Won, W. Kang, Y.-G. Park, J. Park, J.-H. Lee, J. Cheon, H.
H. Lee, J.-U. Park, Smart, soft contact lens for wireless immunosensing of cortisol,
Sci. Adv. 6 (2020) eabb2891, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abb2891.
[189] J. Jang, J. Kim, H. Shin, Y.-G. Park, B.J. Joo, H. Seo, J.-E. Won, D.W. Kim, C.
Y. Lee, H.K. Kim, J.-U. Park, Smart contact lens and transparent heat patch for
remote monitoring and therapy of chronic ocular surface inflammation using
mobiles, Sci. Adv. 7 (2021) eabf7194, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abf7194.
[190] Y. Cheng, X. Luan, J. Weng, L. Zhang, F. Ye, Engineering sampling microneedles
for biomolecules sensing, Chem. Eng. J. 499 (2024) 156130, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2024.156130.
[191] Q. Jin, H.-J. Chen, X. Li, X. Huang, Q. Wu, G. He, T. Hang, C. Yang, Z. Jiang, E. Li,
A. Zhang, Z. Lin, F. Liu, X. Xie, Reduced graphene oxide nanohybrid–assembled
microneedles as mini-invasive electrodes for real-time transdermal biosensing,
Small 15 (2019) 1804298, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201804298.
[192] Q. Wang, Q. Liu, G. Zhong, T. Xu, X. Zhang, Wearable vertical graphene-based
microneedle biosensor for real-time ketogenic diet management, Anal. Chem. 96
(2024) 8713–8720, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.4c00960.
[193] E. Shirzadi, M. Huynh, P. Ghavaminejad, H. Zheng, A. Saini, F. Bakhshandeh,
F. Keyvani, D. Mantaila, F.A. Rahman, J. Quadrilatero, L. Soleymani,
M. Poudineh, A PEDOT:PSS-based composite hydrogel as a versatile electrode for
wearable microneedle sensing platforms, Advanced Sensor Research 3 (2024)
2300122, https://doi.org/10.1002/adsr.202300122.
[194] Y. Liu, L. Yang, Y. Cui, A wearable, rapidly manufacturable, stability-enhancing
microneedle patch for closed-loop diabetes management, Microsystems &
Nanoengineering 10 (2024) 112, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41378-024-00663-y.
[195] S. Afroj, S. Tan, A.M. Abdelkader, K.S. Novoselov, N. Karim, Highly conductive,
scalable, and machine washable graphene-based E-textiles for multifunctional
wearable electronic applications, Adv. Funct. Mater. 30 (2020) 2000293, https://
doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202000293.
[196] X. Qing, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Ding, W. Zhong, D. Wang, W. Wang, Q. Liu, K. Liu,
M. Li, Wearable fiber-based organic electrochemical transistors as a platform for
highly sensitive dopamine monitoring, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11 (2019)
13105–13113.
[197] Y. Wang, X. Qing, Q. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Q. Liu, K. Liu, W. Wang, M. Li, Z. Lu,
Y. Chen, The woven fiber organic electrochemical transistors based on
polypyrrole nanowires/reduced graphene oxide composites for glucose sensing,
Biosens. Bioelectron. 95 (2017) 138–145.
[198] Y. Li, W. Zhou, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, F. Wei, J.-C. Idrobo, S.J. Pennycook,
H. Dai, An oxygen reduction electrocatalyst based on carbon nanotube–graphene
complexes, Nat. Nanotechnol. 7 (2012) 394–400, https://doi.org/10.1038/
nnano.2012.72.
[199] C. Liu, N. Wu, F. Pan, X. Zhang, Z. Wang, L. Wu, J. Lin, W. Liu, J. Liu, Z. Zeng,
Graphene/carbon nanotube aerogels with ultralow filling ratio through perfect
cross-linking interface for efficient microwave absorption, Compos. B Eng. 287
(2024) 111835, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2024.111835.
[200] H. Bao, Q. Zhao, Y. Miao, Y. Li, H. Liu, F. Ma, Vacancy-induced interfacial
crosslinking in graphene/carbon nanotube composites and its influence on
mechanical behaviors: a molecular dynamics simulation, Carbon 232 (2025)
119768, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2024.119768.
[201] H. Chu, X. Hu, C.-Y. Lee, A. Zhang, Y. Ye, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Yan, X. Wang,
J. Wei, S. He, Y. Li, A wearable electrochemical fabric for cytokine monitoring,
Biosens. Bioelectron. 232 (2023) 115301, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bios.2023.115301.
[202] B. Napier, G. Matzeu, F.G. Omenetto, Multi-sensing yarns for continuous wireless
sweat lactate monitoring, Communications Materials 5 (2024) 246, https://doi.
org/10.1038/s43246-024-00680-4.
[203] H. Ma, H. Liang, G. Zhu, J. Jin, J. Song, A. Chen, Y. Zhang, Laser-engraved
graphene on fabrics for customizable and scalable textile electronics, Device.http
://doi.org/10.1016/j.device.2024.100573.

[204] J. Ma, Y. Jiang, L. Shen, H. Ma, T. Sun, F. Lv, Y. Liu, J. Liu, N. Zhu, Oil-water selfassembly engineering of Prussian blue/quantum dots decorated graphene film for
wearable textile biosensors and photoelectronic unit, Chem. Eng. J. 427 (2022)
131824, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.131824.
[205] R. Salahandish, F. Haghayegh, S. Khetani, M. Hassani, A.S. Nezhad, Immunoaffinity potent strip with pre-embedded intermixed PEDOT:PSS conductive
polymers and graphene nanosheets for bio-ready electrochemical biosensing of
central nervous system injury biomarkers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14 (2022)
28651–28662, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.2c07322.
[206] J. Zhu, C. Li, J.-Y. Ou, Q.H. Liu, Perfect light absorption in graphene by two
unpatterned dielectric layers and potential applications, Carbon 142 (2019)
430–437, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2018.10.073.
[207] R.K. Gangwar, A.K. Pathak, F. Chiavaioli, M.H. Abu Bakar, Y.M. Kamil, M.
A. Mahdi, V.K. Singh, Optical fiber SERS sensors: unveiling advances, challenges,
and applications in a miniaturized technology, Coord. Chem. Rev. 510 (2024)
215861, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2024.215861.
[208] A.A. Balandin, Thermal properties of graphene and nanostructured carbon
materials, Nat. Mater. 10 (2011) 569–581, https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat3064.
[209] J.D. Renteria, D.L. Nika, A.A. Balandin, Graphene thermal properties:
applications in thermal management and energy storage, Appl. Sci. 4 (2014)
525–547.
[210] M. Karatas, L. Eriskin, M. Deveci, D. Pamucar, H. Garg, Big data for healthcare
industry 4.0: applications, challenges and future perspectives, Expert Syst. Appl.
200 (2022) 116912, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.116912.
[211] S.A. Alowais, S.S. Alghamdi, N. Alsuhebany, T. Alqahtani, A.I. Alshaya, S.
N. Almohareb, A. Aldairem, M. Alrashed, K. Bin Saleh, H.A. Badreldin, M.S. Al
Yami, S. Al Harbi, A.M. Albekairy, Revolutionizing healthcare: the role of
artificial intelligence in clinical practice, BMC Med. Educ. 23 (2023) 689, https://
doi.org/10.1186/s12909-023-04698-z.
[212] K.-H. Yu, A.L. Beam, I.S. Kohane, Artificial intelligence in healthcare, Nat.
Biomed. Eng. 2 (2018) 719–731, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-018-0305-z.
[213] J. Liu, S. Bao, X. Wang, Applications of graphene-based materials in sensors: a
review, Micromachines 13 (2022) 184.
[214] Q. Meng, H. Li, W. Zhao, M. Song, W. Zhang, X. Li, J. Chen, L. Wang, Overcoming
Debye screening effect in field-effect transistors for enhanced biomarker detection
sensitivity, Nanoscale 16 (2024) 20864–20884, https://doi.org/10.1039/
D4NR03481C.
[215] V. Kesler, B. Murmann, H.T. Soh, Going beyond the Debye length: overcoming
charge screening limitations in next-generation bioelectronic sensors, ACS Nano
14 (2020) 16194–16201, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.0c08622.
[216] I. Utke, J. Michler, R. Winkler, H. Plank, Mechanical properties of 3D
nanostructures obtained by focused electron/ion beam-induced deposition: a
review, Micromachines 11 (2020) 397.
[217] E. Piccinini, S. Alberti, G.S. Longo, T. Berninger, J. Breu, J. Dostalek, O. Azzaroni,
W. Knoll, Pushing the boundaries of interfacial sensitivity in graphene FET
sensors: polyelectrolyte multilayers strongly increase the Debye screening length,
J. Phys. Chem. C 122 (2018) 10181–10188, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpcc.7b11128.
[218] C.-R. Wu, S.-L. Wang, P.-H. Chen, Y.-L. Wang, Y.-R. Wang, J.-C. Chen,
Demonstration of the enhancement of gate bias and ionic strength in electricdouble-layer field-effect-transistor biosensors, Sensor. Actuator. B Chem. 334
(2021) 129567, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2021.129567.
[219] D. Kireev, S.K. Ameri, A. Nederveld, J. Kampfe, H. Jang, N. Lu, D. Akinwande,
Fabrication, characterization and applications of graphene electronic tattoos, Nat.
Protoc. 16 (2021) 2395–2417, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-020-00489-8.
[220] N. Cho, J. Yoo, S.J. Song, J. Lee, S. Jeon, H.J. Yoo, The human body
characteristics as a signal transmission medium for intrabody communication,
IEEE Trans. Microw. Theor. Tech. 55 (2007) 1080–1086, https://doi.org/
10.1109/TMTT.2007.895640.
[221] D. Kireev, N. Koripally, S. Liu, G.C. Fleming, P. Varkey, J. Belle, S. Mohan, S.
S. Han, D. Xu, Y. Jung, Skin controlled electronic and neuromorphic tattoos, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.05449 (2024).

24

