NE235 Nuclear Reactor Operations
Module #5 – Special Topic
Cyber-Security of Nuclear Plant
Industrial Control Systems (ICS)
Dept. of Nuclear Engineering
North Carolina State University

Cyber-Security of Nuclear Plant
Industrial Control Systems (ICS)
Outline
 Aurora Test – case study in what can happen.
 SCADA / ICS Networks – vs- IT Networks
 ICS Attack Vectors – “Kill Chain”
 Cyber Security – Defense in Depth
◼ SSEP Function CDA (Critical Digital Asset) Audit
◼ NIST and ICS-CERT Vulnerability Databases
◼ Threat & Risk Assessment

 PULSTAR Case Review
 History of Cyber Attacks at NPP’s and Industry Vulnerability
Trends
2

Cyber-Security for Industrial Control Systems
Project Aurora:
•

Idaho National Laboratory ran
the Aurora Generator Test in 2007
to demonstrate how a cyber attack
could destroy physical components
of the electric grid.

•

The experiment used a computer
program to rapidly open and close
a diesel generator’s programmable
circuit breakers out of phase from
the rest of the grid and cause it to
explode.

•

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v
=LM8kLaJ2NDU

This vulnerability is especially a concern because much grid equipment supports
using Modbus and other legacy communications protocols that were designed
without security in mind. As such, they don't support authentication, confidentiality,
or replay protection, which means any attacker that can communicate with the
device can control it.

3

Cyber-Security for Nuclear ICS
SCADA: “Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition” Network Architecture
“Remote Terminal
Unit /
Programmable Logic
Controller”
e.g. Aurora
Programmable
Digital Relay!
-orControl Rod Position
Indicator
Primary Flow Rate
Sensor
Networked Radiation
Monitors
Variable Frequency
Drive (VFD)
Controller for pumps,
ventilation
etc…

Attack Vectors

4

Cyber-Security for Nuclear ICS
Common Cyber Attack Vectors
 Wireless Capable devices
◼ printers, cameras, “Internet-ofThings” devices, etc. increase
attack surface
 Removable Media & Mobile Devices
◼ USB/CD/DVD, flash media, laptops,
smart phones, etc.
 Business networks not isolated from
Operational ICS network.
 Supply Chain / Vendors
◼ Equipment procurement
◼ Software updates or patches
5

Cyber-Security for Nuclear ICS

Common Attack Delivery Methods
Many ICS-related attacks use unsophisticated methods of delivery:
◼ Phishing – A deceptive email designed to trick the recipient into
disclosing sensitive information, usually account access credentials
◼ Spear phishing – A phishing email using targeted information designed
specifically for the recipient.
◼ “Whaling” - A spear phishing attack targeting an executive with access
to sensitive corporate information.
◼ Watering hole attack – Delivery of malware through a seemingly
legitimate web site. Either a deceptive link is provided to a user, often
through phishing or a legitimate website can be hacked.
6

Cyber “Kill Chain”

Use ‘Defense in Depth’ to
Disrupt the Kill Chain!

7

Cyber-Security: Defense In Depth
 Cyber-Security Culture:
◼ Policies – Management Commitment to Cyber-Security
◼ Procedures – **CDA (Critical Digital Asset) Audit**, Password Management, Least
Permissions, Vendor access, Firewall Rules, Air Gap/Flash Media control,
Configuration/Settings Backups, Recovery from Attack
◼ Training - Procedures, Cyber Hygiene, Cyber-Awareness – e.g. Spear Phishing, Social
Media (LinkedIn, Facebook)

 Hardware Solutions:
◼ Network Zones, Data Diodes, Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS), Unified Threat
Management (UTM), VPN, Air-Gapped ICS sub-networks, Design Simplification!!

 Software Solutions:
◼ Software Control (remove unused modules/drivers which may provide vulnerabilities
and attack vectors), Whitelisting, Network scanning tools, Encryption, Anti-virus,
install software updates and patches that will mitigate CVEs (Common Vulnerability
Exposures) without compromising operation of the ICS networks.
8

Cyber Security
Assessment Methodology
1. Perform an Audit of Facility CDA and Cyber Security Hygiene:
a) Create an Inventory facility CDA
b) Determine Connectivity, Configuration, and Software Vulnerabilities for each CDA
c) Trace CDA Network Maps, Interdependencies & level of Physical Protection
d) Evaluate Facility Cyber-Security Culture, Hygiene, Procedures, and Training.

2. Using the Audit results, perform a Cyber Security Risk Assessment of CDA:
a) Evaluate Potential Attacker Threats:

Threat = Capability + Intent + Opportunity
b) Assess Vulnerability of CDAs to attack.

Tenet of OPSEC
“Operations
Security”

Vulnerability = CVE/Exploits + Network Vectors + Interdependencies
c) Determine the Consequences of a successful cyber-attack on each CDA.

3. Rank Risk and Prioritize Mitigation:
Risk Index = Threat x Vulnerability x Consequence
9

Reactor Industrial Control System (ICS)
Identify and Audit Critical Digital Assets (CDA)
SSEP: “Safety, Security,
Emergency Preparedness”
Functions
•
•

•

•
•

•

Reactor safety and
operational control.
Physical security of the
facility including
personnel access
monitoring and control.
Detection of
unsafe/unauthorized
conditions.
Emergency
response/communications
Storage and protection of
Safe Guarded Information
(SGI).
Accurate
inventory/location of
nuclear materials.

“Critical Digital Assets” (CDA)
- vs non-critical digital assets (e.g. IT assets)

10

Assessment Methodology – CDA Audit
CDA Inventory and Audit:
i. Inventory - Create listing of Reactor ICS CDA.
ii. CDA Configuration Information:
Model, vendor, operating system and application software, software
updates, settings/configuration data, accounts/user IDs/passwords
(defaults used?)
iii. Physical Protection of CDA – Is it inside or outside the secured area? In a
locked cabinet?
iv. Information Published - Are schematics or detailed descriptions of
facility systems available on the facility website, in publications, or in
publicly available educational materials?
v. CDA Interdependencies – Functioning dependent on building utilities
(water, electric, gas, HVAC) and telecommunication or network services?
11

Assessment Methodology – CDA Audit
Audit CDA Interdependencies:

•

•
•
•

Service Provider Audit Form:
• Availability Requirements
• Fully or Partially met?

Building Utilities:
o Electrical Power
o Natural Gas
o Water
HVAC
Network
Telecommunications
12

Assessment Methodology – CDA Audit
Audit Application and Operating Software Vulnerabilities:
a) National Institute of Standards (NIST) National Vulnerability Database (NVD) –
Check for known exploits specific to each CDA. Search for Common Vulnerability and
Exposures (CVE) software issues.
i. Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS)
ii. Attack Complexity
iii. Access Complexity

b) DHS ICS-CERT ‘Control Systems Advisories and Reports’ Databases
Check for specific alerts and advisories related to facility CDA operating and application
software, including CVE:
i. Attack Difficulty
ii. Vulnerability Impact
iii. Vulnerability Characterization
iv. Mitigation Tools
13

Assessment Methodology – CDA Audit
NIST National Vulnerability Database
The Vulnerability Scoring Index (VSI) is being assessed for the operation and application
software installed on each CDA utilizing the NIST National Vulnerability Database at
https://nvd.nist.gov/.

The National Vulnerability
Database search engine is a
powerful tool that allows
the user to enter detailed
search parameters looking
for Common Vulnerabilities
and Exposures (CVE) or
Common Platform
Enumerations (CPE) for
each audited CDA.
Challenges: Learning curve
for correctly applying and
utilizing the search engine!
14

Assessment Methodology – CDA Audit
ICS-CERT Advisories and Alerts Database
Industrial Control
Systems (ICS) – Cyber
Emergency Response
Team (CERT):
https://ics-cert.uscert.gov/

CHECK ‘EM OUT!

Alerts Database threats to critical
infrastructure
networks
Advisories - current
security issues,
vulnerabilities and
exploits
15

Assessment Methodology – Network Audit
Audit ICS Network Configuration:
1. Determine device communication
protocols:
a) Connected to a LAN? Air gapped?

b) Remote connectivity - Wifi or
Bluetooth? Enabled or disabled?
2. Trace Network Maps:
a) Map local network architecture:
ICS hardware components,
network switches and routers,
network addresses.
b) Are network zones utilized and
maintained? Firewalls, virtual
private networks (VPN), data
diodes?
16

Assessment Methodology – Audit
Audit Institutional Cyber-Security Policies and Procedures:
Evaluate existing institutional cybersecurity culture, policies, procedures
and training as applied to reactor ICS

i. Policy – A policy statement formalizing management commitment to
implementing effective cyber security practices.
ii. Procedures – password administration, ‘least permissions’, configuration
settings, maintenance of firewalls or VPN, disabling unneeded wireless
communication functionality, effective air gapping requirements and scanning
of portable media, a trusted vendor program, encryption requirements for
digital SGI, incident response and reporting, performing periodic audits.
iii.Training - introductory and refresher training in procedures, good cyberhygiene practices, phishing awareness, proper use of social media (e.g.
LinkedIn, Facebook).
17

Assessment Methodology – Evaluate Threat Metrics
Attacker Capability:
Defined as the means or resources the attacker would require to carry out an
attack, including needed skills, expertise, knowledge, money & tools.
For the purpose of this assessment, the availability of certain exploitation tools
or malware will be utilized to assess attacker capability. Any identified release of
exploitation tools (e.g. targeting specific PLCs) or ICS focused malware obtained
in the review of the ICS-CERT ‘Alerts’ database is applicable to setting this metric.
Attacker Capability Index (ACI):
ACI
1

Parameter
Low - No exploitation tools or malware identified that could impact facility
ICS or CDA.

2

Medium - Exploitation tools or malware identified that could generally
impact facility ICS.

3

High - Specific exploitation tools or malware identified that could impact
specific CDA.
18

Assessment Methodology – Evaluate Threat Metrics
Attacker Intent:
Defined based on whether emerging threats, or an identified increase in activities by
malicious groups, including hacktivist or anarchist groups, have been identified as
targeting CDA.
The data obtained in the review of the ICS-CERT ‘Alerts’ database is applicable to
setting this metric. The Alerts database is reviewed to determine if any emerging
threats or activities have been identified that generally target ICS infrastructure, or
that target the specific type(s) of facility CDA.
Attacker Intent Index (AII):
AII
1

2

3

Parameter
Low – No Emerging threats identified; no identified increase in activities by
malicious groups, including hacktivist or anarchist groups, targeting ICS
infrastructure or specific type of CDA.
Medium - Emerging threat(s) identified general to ICS infrastructure;
identified increase in activities by malicious groups, including hacktivist or
anarchist groups, generally targeting ICS infrastructure.
High – Emerging threat(s) identified specific to CDA; identified increase in
activities by malicious groups, including hacktivist or anarchist groups,
targeting specific type of CDA.

19

Assessment Methodology – Evaluate Threat Metrics
Attacker Opportunity:
Defined as the set of conditions that need to be met for an adversary to be confident their attack will be
successful.
Opportunities are related to the exposure and vulnerability of targets. This can be related to the level of
physical access an adversary has to a CDA target, as well as access to specific knowledge about the
system.
Attacker Opportunity Index (AOI):

AOI

1

2

3

Parameter
Low - Must meet all of the following criteria:
i)
Physical access to the CDA is restricted (i.e. it is in a secured cabinet or room) and communication port locks are
installed.
ii)
Specific information about CDA, including model numbers and system descriptions or schematics, are not
published or available online.
iii) Effective cyber hygiene practices are in place, and the facility implements official cyber security policies,
procedures and training.
Medium – Must meet all of the following criteria:
i)
There is limited or intermittent physical access to CDA, or communication port locks are not installed.
ii)
Limited specific information about CDA may be published or available online.
iii) “Ad hoc”, unofficial, or otherwise limited cyber hygiene practices, policies, procedures, and/or training are in
place.
High - Conditions that do not meet requirement given for 1 or 2 above.
20

Assessment - Evaluate Vulnerability Metrics
Network Protection Index:
Determine whether a CDA connected to a network or air gapped is well protected from
unauthorized network access.
This is a function of the network configuration and procedural network security measures
that are in place.
Network Protection Index (NPI):
NPI

1

2

3

Parameter
Low: Must meet all of the following criteria:
i)
CDA has either a) no local or remote digital connectivity, b) is effectively air gapped with
commensurate procedural controls, or c) has >2 levels of maintained network protection (i.e.
firewalled zones not including enterprise firewall, VPN, etc…).
ii) No capability for portable media and mobile devices (PMMD) or media capability is “controlled”
(scanned, secured, maintained, etc.).
iii) Robust password protections are in place in accordance with the device capability and are
regularly changed, maintained, or updated. Least permissions access restrictions employed
where supported.
Medium: Must meet all of the following criteria:
i)
CDA is functionally air-gapped (e.g. no LAN/Wifi connection, but without PMMD scanning
infrastructure) or isolated from public network via at least one maintained firewall that is not the
enterprise firewall.
ii) Passwords or passcodes in use, with no defaults enabled or used.
High: All other assets that do not meet requirement given for 1 or 2 above.

21

Assessment - Evaluate Vulnerability Metrics
Vulnerability Scoring Index:
Review the “Common Vulnerability Exposures” (CVE) obtained from the DHS ICS-CERT
‘Control Systems Advisories and Reports’ databases and the NIST National Vulnerability
Database search engine.
The version of the operating system software, whether it is updated automatically, and
whether antivirus protection is active also inform this metric.
Vulnerability Scoring Index (VSI):
VSI

Parameter

1

Operating System Software (For PC/workstation based CDA): Current supported OS version installed and
automatically or actively updated – OR – if automatic updates are disabled, whitelisting software is installed
and maintained; antivirus software is installed, enabled, and actively updated.

- AND -

2

3

Application Software or Firmware: No CVE’s identified for installed software versions.
Operating System Software (For PC/workstation based CDA): Current supported OS version installed but
not automatically updated and whitelisting software is not installed or maintained; antivirus software is
installed, enabled, and actively updated.
- AND Application Software or Firmware: < 3 CVE identified for current version with maximum associated
Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) Base Score(s) < 6.9.
Conditions that do not meet the requirements given for 1 or 2 above.

22

Assessment - Evaluate Vulnerability Metrics
Interdependency Vulnerability Index:
Review the interdependencies identified and documented during the audit to inform this
metric.
Interdependency Vulnerability Index (IVI):
IVI

1

2

3

Parameter
Low: Meets one or more of the following criteria:
i)
The service provider can ‘Fully Meet the Conditions’ required in order to support the
interdependent service or function under all conditions.
ii) Redundant backups exist that fully mitigate any loss of service from the provider (e.g. backup
generator providing electrical power, cell phone communication –vs- land line, backup parallel
network connection, emergency water supply, etc…).
iii) Loss of service results in CDA or SSEP system defaulting to a fail-safe condition relative to the
associated consequence metric.
Medium: Meets one or more of the following criteria:
i)
The service provider can ‘Partially Meet the Conditions’ required in order to support the
interdependent service or function, or only under limited conditions.
ii) Redundant backups exist that only partially or temporarily mitigate any loss of service from the
provider (e.g. backup generator providing limited electrical power, limited communication backup,
etc…)
High: All other interdependencies that do not meet the requirements given for 1 or 2 above.
23

Assessment – Evaluate Consequence Metrics
Consequence Index:
Consequence Index (CI):
CI
1

2

Parameter

Low Level Consequence – Attack on experimental facilities or non-safety related
equipment causing administrative burdens, including theft or corruption of experimental
data or safeguarded documents.
Medium Level Consequence – Attack on experimental facilities or auxiliary systems
resulting in potential loss of service, loss of control, or damage to equipment.

3

High Level Consequence – Attack on safety related (e.g. SSEP) equipment,
instrumentation, or radiation monitoring system resulting in an increased probability of
radiation exposure or injury to personnel.

4

Critical Level Consequence – Attack on reactor control or emergency systems (e.g. SSEP)
resulting in an elevated probability of a loss of control, of damage to reactor systems, of
potential diversion of radioactive material, or an uncontrolled release offsite.

The consequences of a successful cyber-attack on NPR CDA would vary from low to
severe depending on the function of the reactor ICS as determined during the audit.
24

Risk Assessment
Rank Risk and Prioritize Mitigation:
The Risk Index (RI) may be determined as follows:
Threat Index (TI)

= ACI + AII + AOI

Vulnerability Index (VI)

= NPI + VSI + IVI

Risk Index (RI) = [ TI x VI x CI ]/C
where C is a normalizing constant.
The larger the Risk Index value, the larger the associated risk of a successful
cyber-attack on the CDA and systems evaluated.
Risk Index (RI):
RI > 0.5

Highest Priority for Mitigation.

0.5 > RI > 0.25

Medium Priority for Mitigation.

RI < 0.25

Lowest Priority for Mitigation.
25

Case Study
PULSTAR ICS Initial Risk Assessment Results
Reactor ICS Assessment Outcomes:
• 84 separate CDA were identified,
audited and reviewed.
• On-line experimental systems had
initial RI values of up to 0.35
• All reactor control and safety related
ICS had initial RI values of <0.25
• More than 17,000 CVE were found for
CDA operating systems and application
software.
• Many workstations/CDA running
outdated operating systems or
firmware.
• “Air gaped” systems only nominally
protected. No air gap infrastructure.
• Significant level of reactor ICS
information published, increasing
attacker opportunity.

Physical Security System Assessment OutcomesAreas for Improvement:
1) hardening access reader hardware, 2) upgrading server
infrastructure (separating security functions on virtual
machines), and 3) updating procedural requirements
(authentication of authorized users).

26

Nuclear Industry Vulnerability Trends
Multiple trends within the nuclear industry are driving increased
vulnerability to attack
❑ Automation and digital attack surface is growing
❑ Information about employees, infrastructure and processes
publically available on internet
❑ Increasing use of wireless technologies
❑ High propagation of foreign-made equipment in power industry

❑ Cybersecurity education for all employees is not a priority.
❑ “Over-functionality” of digital equipment – No way to remove
unused hardware and code which may provide vulnerabilities and
attack vectors
27

Historic Nuclear Cyber Attacks (1)
Davis Besse
• Details
• 2003 – Davis Besse in Ohio
• Slammer Worm spanning
corporate and control networks
• Impact
• Complete shutdown of digital
portion of Safety Parameter
Display System (SPDS) and Plant
Process Computer (PPC) for 5
hours.
• Lesson
• Firewalls do not provide
invincibility for control systems
from cyber threats

Hatch Plant Patch
• Details
• 2008 at Hatch nuclear plant in
Georgia
• Software update on business
network system reset data on
control system and impacted
safety systems
• Impact
• Automated safety systems at the
plant triggered a shutdown
• Lesson
• Dangers of two-way
communication from corporate
networks to control networks.
Control systems should be
isolated from corporate networks
28

Historic Nuclear Cyber Attacks (2)
Stuxnet

Phishing Operators

• Details
• Details
• 2010 at Natanz Iranian Enrichment
• 2014 at Korea Hydro and Nuclear
Facility
Power (KHNP) in South Korea
• Malicious worm targeted PLCs
• 6,000 phishing emails containing
malicious code sent to 3,500
• Network isolation bypassed
employees
• Impact
• Impact
• destroyed ≈ 1,000 uranium
• Confidential Information Leaked
enriching centrifuges
including personal details of 10,000
• ≈ 30% decrease in enrichment
employees and reactor designs and
efficiency
manuals
• Lesson
• Lesson
• Proved possibility that
• Phishing remains effective and can
sophisticated malware could target
be well-crafted
air-gapped control systems and
nuclear facilities.
29

Recent Nuclear Cyber Attacks
Virus at NPP

Nuclear 17

• Details
• Details
• June 2017 at a US nuclear power
• 2016 at Gundremmingen nuclear
plant and other utilities and energy
plant in Germany
related entities
• W32.Ramnit and Conficker Viruses
• Fake resumes with executable code
• Impact
• Targeted senior control engineers
• Found on 18 removable data drives
• Found in office computers systems • Impact
• Corporate network compromised
• No damage to operational network
via spearphishing emails
• Lesson
• Redirected internet traffic through
• Confirms USBs as a likely attack
attacker’s machines
vector for nuclear facilities
• Lesson
• Phishing remains effective
• Watering Hole attacks are often
used in conjunction with phishing
attacks.
30

Continuously Evolving Cyber Threat Landscape

31

Summary
Safety is key and nuclear is not immune
Common cyber security attacks include phishing,
spear phishing, and watering hole attacks
Tools are available to help identify security issues
and vulnerabilities

• Homework 4 and Homework 5 both due next
week.
• Lab on Thursday!

32

