1 (5s):
This is What Now with Trevor Noah.

Brooklinen (10s):
This episode is brought to you by Brooklinen. As the seasons shift and we spend more time at home, how
are you making your better space that works for everything? Whether it's spending time with loved ones,
sharing laughs with your pets, reading your new favorite book, or simply unwinding. For me, it's all about
creating a space that's really inviting, and that's where Brooklyn comes in. You see, the special thing that
they've got, in my opinion, is they've got a mastering of texture. They've just figured it out. Their sheaths are
so soft. Then you add in the comforter, which I'll be honest, during this winter, I've really been loving and that
my friends is the perfect equation. And I'm not the only person who feels this way. Brooklyn's Bedding is
highly tested and awarded Good Housekeeping, gq, wire Cutter. They all rank their goods. Super highly
Brooklynn bedding sheets and more have over 200,005 star reviews. So shop award winners and fan
favorites in store or online@brooklynn.com. That's B-R-O-O-K-L-I-N-E n.com. Get 15% off your first order
today.

Apple (1m 31s):
If you love iPhone, you'll love Apple Card. It comes with the privacy and security you expect from Apple.
Plus, you earn up to 3% daily cash back on every purchase, which can automatically earn interest when you
open a high yield savings account through Apple Card. Apply for Apple Card in the wallet app. Subject to
credit approval. Savings is available to Apple Card owners, subject to eligibility Apple Card and savings by
Goldman Sachs Bank, USA, salt Lake City, branch member, FDIC terms and more at Apple Card dot com.

1 (2m 14s):
How much time do we have with you?

2 (2m 16s):
As much as you want. It's my last thing

1 (2m 17s):
Of the day, man. Oh yes. Oh yes.

2 (2m 19s):
Yeah. I was like, fuck it. Let's go.

1 (2m 21s):
Do you wanna start with the Kanye or should we

2 (2m 26s):
Actually, I wanted to show you what I'm wearing underneath here.

1 (2m 30s):
Can

2 (2m 30s):
You imagine? That would've been really funny if I turned up in like a fur coat and nothing underneath
would've been a bit of a weird joke.

1 (2m 37s):
Actually, I, I actually do wanna start with the Kanye. So as the executive producer of the Grammys Yeah. Do
you like, are You happy or are you pissed? Was there another emotion that comes with seeing Kanye West,
like pop up on the Grammys red carpets when he wasn't supposed to be there? Like, is there like a thing
that No. 'cause on, on one hand it's good for the show in a way. 'cause everyone's like, oh shit, what's gonna
happen? Oh, and then on the other hand, it's like you have a pre-planned thing. Like what's your first
emotion when that happens?

2 (3m 7s):
Genuinely, honestly. Yeah. I couldn't care either way. Like I, I I I, I was like, I think he's like, he's not for me.
Yeah. And so like, I was just like, oh, it's, You Know, it's just what he does. Right. He, he, but I, I genuinely
didn't think about it. The, the truth of it is during that red carpet, You Know? Yeah. Like I am, that is, that is
the most stressful period of like my year. That that one hour that, like that 90 minutes, because

1 (3m 34s):
That's the one hour leading into

2 (3m 35s):
The show. That's the 90 minutes where you finish a dress rehearsal, which went terribly. Yeah. And you
finish that at like two 40 and then the show goes live at five. It's like that l Michaels thing. He always says, it
doesn't matter when you are ready. The show goes live at five and it is what it is. So like there was, the thing
about Kanye, I genuinely didn't even see it till after the show. Honestly, I didn't.

1 (3m 55s):
Wow. Like,

2 (3m 56s):
I, I, I knew there was a thing and I knew he had done like a stunt with his wife. And I was like, oh, it's like, is
the cameras gonna work? Is the comms gonna work? Is the show gonna work? Like, that's all. I genuinely,
that's what I was thinking about at that time. I was very in the zone, so I wasn't distracted, but I knew he
wasn't coming to the main show.

1 (4m 12s):
How did You Know that? Because

2 (4m 14s):
I'd heard, I'd heard that he was just coming to the red carpet and then leaving and he didn't have a, I'm in,
I'm in charge of the floor plan. Yeah, yeah, yeah,

1 (4m 20s):
Yeah. So that's, well, that's what got me. 'cause I know where everyone's gonna be sitting. And I didn't see
Kanye then for a moment I thought you didn't tell me Kanye was coming 'cause you wanted to surprise me. I

2 (4m 30s):
Don dunno if anyone knew Kanye was coming, but I think I don, but there was no truth, genuinely no truth to
him being kicked out. Like I, that's just not true. He, he went and did the carpet and as far as I understand it,
he then got in a car and left. Huh. I tell

1 (4m 41s):
You that. But did he tell people he was coming?

2 (4m 43s):
I don't know. Genuinely. I don know. You'd have to ask the Academy.

3 (4m 46s):
I suppose in theory, there's no way to stop him from coming. So, well, if he came as Jay-Z's

2 (4m 51s):
Guest, he was nominated. Right. For example.

3 (4m 52s):
Right. Yeah. That's was

1 (4m 53s):
He nominated. Yeah,

3 (4m 54s):
That's true. If he comes, if he comes as Jay-Z's guest, Ben K then say, Hey dude, You Know, welcome here.

2 (4m 59s):

Yeah, that's right. If you're a plus one. That's true. That's a very good point. Because I never know the plus
ones. So You Know that like, yeah, Madison Beer is sat over here. She

1 (5m 9s):
'cause Kanye,

2 (5m 10s):
Kanye West lost. You

3 (5m 11s):
Got nothing Uzi. Right. So it

2 (5m 15s):
Could have been Yeah, but you said that. But then, but then people, you're right. You don't know. And people
show up with famous people and then suddenly they're on camera. Like you didn't know they were coming.
And it's like, oh, they're there with, You Know, whoever. I

1 (5m 25s):
Think this was the most dramatic red carpet we've had at the Grammys, like in the years that we've done it
together because we, like, this was the year where Kanye steps onto the Grammy. Then immediately people
were, there's every opinion, right? So some people were going, how can the Grammys allow this? There are
children there now there's a naked woman on the red carpet. My children, there's always the children. I'm
always like, there's a, You Know, the children are there. The children. The children. So that's what the people
were saying. And then, I don't know If you saw any of these actually, 'cause you're so wrapped up in the
show. Yeah. See also, but then there was caught it afterwards. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Then there was the baby
face. Oh, oh, I saw that. That you see that,

2 (6m 1s):
Right? I did see that. Yeah.

1 (6m 2s):
The, I did see that the two AP reporters or whatever they were were interviewing Chapo. Yeah. They're
interviewing baby face, mid-conversation. Yeah. They're just like, ah,

2 (6m 10s):
You Know what? I only actually saw that well afterwards because Chloe Kardashian tweeted about it. She
posted the video going, oh damn, Babyface is a legend. How dare you? And the first thing I thought is, and a
Babyface is a mate of mine. Yeah. Like, I love baby face. Like, he's like, not only is he, he a legend and an
icon and a music official. He's also one of the nicest men. He actually is. No, he's genuine. There is no,

3 (6m 31s):
Even how he handled that wasn't,

1 (6m 33s):
Yeah,

2 (6m 33s):
Yeah. Yeah. Oh my God. He's full of love and praise. I love being around him. Like I, I find him an in, I find
him an inspiring dude just from his life manner. And, but I felt sorry for those reporters. I actually did because
it's like, it's like the culture that we are in right now where like they, they're red carpet reporters on ap.
They're not Trevor Noah hosting the Grammys. They don't have 10,000 hours of experience. They're on a
thing. They probably don't know the story and the history of Babyface commitment to music. And then
Chapel Row, who is one of the biggest stars, they don't, they know Chapel Row better than they'd ever know
Babyface. And they're like, oh, don't. And they know that they're gonna get more bang for their buck there.
Yeah. I'm not being disrespectful. The papers, of course they had it badly, but I think hate the way society.

1 (7m 15s):
But I think it's also why he said, Do you want that? Like he think

2 (7m 17s):
About it, he was so sweet.

1 (7m 18s):
That man has been in the game since when Yeah. Yeah. He knows every red carpet. He knows every per,
he knows what the game is about. So he, to your point, he didn't even, he, he had no ego in the way he did
it. He was like, oh, you guys need that, don't you? Yeah. And he's like, I'm on my way. He's like, I stopped to
talk to you because you need this. Yes. And now he's like, I get that. You need that. Yeah. But you could, I
think what it was is this, he doesn't need it. No, he doesn't. He doesn't. So he wasn't offended in any way.
And he was like, oh, whatever. He is like, I don't need this. I agree.

2 (7m 44s):
I just wish people didn't immediately like, go out to find who those two girls are and then let's, let's just make
their life miserable. That

1 (7m 50s):
It's, you just wish the internet doesn't exist. Yeah, I

2 (7m 52s):

Guess so. Well, in

3 (7m 53s):
All fairness, I do need, there's a certain, I think there's like a certain amount of accountability that they need
to be held to

2 (8m 0s):
Why? It's a red carpet. No one even needed to see it. No one have known about it. Why does everyone
need to be so offended all the time?

1 (8m 6s):
No, but okay. Okay. I'll, I'll on

3 (8m 8s):
His behalf. I see

1 (8m 8s):
Why people

2 (8m 9s):
Are, but if he wasn't, he said straight afterwards that I didn't care less. Yes. He'd be embarrassed by this
whole thing.

1 (8m 13s):
Yes. I think it's a, it's a tough lesson for them to like the way they're learning the lesson. If they had a good
producer, someone would just say like, don't do it like that again. Yeah. Next time Rope the person in. Oh my
God. It's Chaperone Babyface. Do You Know Chapel R? That's Kevin. Yes. Oh, chapel. Have you ever
That's how man. Oh, legend. Old school legend. New. Oh man. Chapel's like, it's a big bug. You have to, you
have to work with baby If you two should do a thing. And then you get those magic moments as well on the
carpet where it's like, now you've got Baby Face and Chapel Rone,

2 (8m 37s):
Whoever saw that coming.

1 (8m 38s):
And then she might go, I'm a huge fan of this song. And he's like, what? I didn't know. She's like, yeah, the
way you remix that, the thing you do with Mariah Carey on that song. Oh, it inspired me to sing that. That
could have been a moment. That's

2 (8m 47s):
Why they're paying the big bucks.

3 (8m 49s):
But this,

2 (8m 50s):
We saw a lesson in hosting there, a lesson in, I thought I was coming to What Now I'm actually coming to
Masterclass. I'm coming to Masterclass with

1 (8m 60s):
Trevor Noah. Ah, this guy. I can't even,

3 (9m 2s):
I was gonna say, this is actually the issue though with a lot of the, I I'll say podcast culture or the people that
end up broadcasting without putting in the 10,000 hours. Right. Because back in the day, If you ended up
with any kind of a platform, you would've done things like a small television station or whatever it is. That's
actually true. And you get to the point where, yeah, that's true. You Know how to deal with the red carpet
moments, which is largely unscripted. Anything happens. Now what you end up with is people that obviously
have a very, very strong following, but they haven't got the experience behind them to be able to know to do
something like that.

1 (9m 35s):
Yeah.

2 (9m 35s):
Sorry, I'm sorry, I'm confused. We're talking about two girls who are hosting for AP live on a red carpet at the
Grammy's. Yeah. That's not, they're not hosting the Oscars here. No,

1 (9m 45s):
But I get but Caesar's right though. No,

2 (9m 46s):
No. But this is their experience.

1 (9m 47s):
No, but Caesar No, but he's where Caesar's, right. Back in the day, you couldn't even get to the AP hosting
on the red carpet without having like, You Know what, You Know what you see, this actually is with standup
comedy now today. Right. There are comedy clubs around the country, like the US particularly, and some in

the world where they've started hiring people who are funny on TikTok. And then they come to the comedy
club, their fans come, they pack it up and then 10 minutes in, everyone realizes no one was prepared for this
moment. Like the, the TikTok comedian doesn't know how to make the people laugh or doesn't know how to
shift with the room. The room doesn't know what to do. And then club owners started booking backup acts
for the TikTok stars because they knew that red carpet thing would happens to them in the clubs.

1 (10m 29s):
So I hear what you're saying. No, I, but I also get what you're saying.

2 (10m 32s):
It's

1 (10m 32s):
Fair. It's not like they shot baby face, is what I'm saying. No, no, no. Let's be honest. Yeah. We're also
making it seem like Yeah. What they did, we made it seem like, like there were some people online who were
like, baby face you, I can't believe all the work. They made it seem like baby face, like dragged himself down
the carpets. Yeah, exactly. Still bleeding from the wound they had inflicted upon him.

2 (10m 49s):
It's difficult. And it's difficult on live and it's like, ugh. And I got it. They knew that they were gonna get more
hits if they managed to get chapel then. And Chapel's not hanging around. Chapel's not gonna go. And I
don't mean anything about Chapel, but she's not gonna go, oh, I'll sit here for six minutes' finished with Baby
Face, she's on. And you've either got get her or you don't. And I get it. But you are right. The way they
should have done it would be the collapse.

1 (11m 8s):
Yeah. I think there's just like a, a swag that to your point, would come from experience. I wonder what
would've happened if Kanye came in. I'm not gonna lie, I kept on wondering what would've

3 (11m 18s):
Happened inside the venue. Yeah. Oof. Nothing would've, well, nothing would've happened.

1 (11m 23s):
He done something. No, what I mean is like, yes,

3 (11m 24s):
He most likely would've done something.

1 (11m 25s):

So you think he would've come on stage? A

3 (11m 26s):
Hundred percent. And I'll tell you why. Whenever there's been a big moment and Kanye knows that he can
seize it, he will. Funny enough, MTV awards, I don't even know what year it was when he stepped on stage
and Justice versus Simeon won the video for Video of the Year. Yeah. And he had, what's that?

1 (11m 50s):
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.

3 (11m 51s):
Anyway, that video, he had that video nominated. He steps on stage and he goes, man, this video cost a
million dollars. Fam, I had Nia Long in this. So whenever there's a moment that he can seize for attention, he
does it. Yeah. He, yeah. Now, obviously that was a long time ago. Maybe he's a different man now.

1 (12m 7s):
Well, I don't think so. He like seized the red carpets.

3 (12m 10s):
Yes.

2 (12m 11s):
How would you have coped if he was in the room? How would you have felt? Honestly, if he was in the room
knowing that he was there, knowing that there's an unpredictability around you at those tables because

1 (12m 19s):
You are vulnerable. Okay. So

2 (12m 20s):
'cause you are not Most hosts Yeah. Are on a stage. Yes. They're away from people.

1 (12m 24s):
Yeah. They're not amongst the people.

2 (12m 25s):
You are right in amongst it. Okay.

1 (12m 26s):
So two, one, he's very unpredictable, but I have met Kanye and Post me and Kanye having a thing, and can

I tell you, he was very sweet. He was very nice. He had a cordial conversation. And one of the, one of the
things about Kanye that I think a lot of people don't know is even when he has his, like, You Know, when he,
when he spins and when he's going through something, whatever it might be, bipolar or not. Kanye West
loves comedy, like loves comedy and loves telling jokes. And If you listen to his raps, You Know how much
he loves telling jokes. He's got some of the best punchlines in his raps. But when he tweets them, I think a
lot of them don't come off. Well. And comedy as we all know, you miss, You Know what I Mean? Comedy's
about Mrs.

1 (13m 7s):
So, so the first part I'll say is this. I wouldn't be afraid, but I would be worried for the show and what's gonna
happen. 'cause now is Kanye gonna go up when Taylor's up again? Now is, is Kanye gonna, 'cause now I'm
the person who's in the room and then now I go, You Know, you don't want Kanye us getting tackled by a
security guard, but you also don't wanna be the security guard. So I, I don't know what it would be. I think I
would, I would have, and then on a night when we are there and half the room, I would say even three
quarters of the room has like a strange more roast feeling to them. That's not the night you want
unpredictability. No. Yeah. Do You Know what I Mean? Because I don't know about you, but like this, this
Grammys emotionally was the hardest Grammys I've ever done.

1 (13m 50s):
Mm, yeah.

2 (13m 52s):
I Mean, for sure. That's, look, Kanye, the Kanye thing is, look for me, I would've, IIII would've done
everything. We ca I dunno, would

1 (14m 1s):
You cut to him or cut away from him? I, I,

2 (14m 2s):
I'm not gonna talk on him and the Grammys either way. Luckily I didn't even know about it 'cause I was too
busy. But I'm Ne like, I'm not gonna go outta my way and go, oh, let's clear a table. Let's get rid of one of the
nominees in the jazz degree. Makes to give yay a table. I'm not, but if it's, it's up to the academy anyway, it's
nothing to do with me.

1 (14m 17s):
I think people would've been stressed in the room.

2 (14m 19s):
But it was, but moving from that, it was a very different atmosphere because people didn't know how they

were supposed to feel. Yeah. And it was a really weird one because everybody's there and you won them
over in a big way. And so did the show. And I feel really good about that. And the response that we've had
from it. I dunno If you read reviews, I don't. But like, so the,

1 (14m 39s):
No, I don't.

2 (14m 40s):
So, vanity Fair Variety Hollywood reporter also without question, best Grammys of all time. Like, they're
really going wild of it. And I do think that's because you got the balance really well. No, I think,

1 (14m 48s):
But it was, I think the, I think the show show

2 (14m 50s):
Incredibly tricky for sure. Yeah. 'cause people don't know whether, is this supposed to be a sad event? Is it a
happy event? Are we dancing or are we crying? Are we giving Yeah. Or are we taking, like, and it was very, it
was a weird dance for you to have to do. Yeah. But I

1 (15m 3s):
Knew that. But no, but I, but I think for all of us, so okay, like to your point, we, You Know, everything is
happening in relation to everything else. That's life, right? So now you're in Los Angeles where everyone,
you forget six degrees of separation. Everyone either lost a home or knows someone who lost a home. So
it's as simple as that. You start, you just start with that, right? So you've got the room full of people. But now
what I realized as the night was going was we're also in a moment where the majority of the people in that
room are also feeling a certain kind of way. So Lady Gaga, if it was any other year, would've just been like,
fun times, thank you very much. And then Lady Gaga goes, yo, trans people are not invisible. Then you're
like, oh shit.

1 (15m 43s):
Yes, Trump said the thing, and this is on Gaga's mind. And she, You Know, and then you think that's done.
And then Chapel Rone comes up, she wins the award. She doesn't just go like, what a good time. I love life.
Wow. I'm a, I'm a, I'm a new artist. I'm the best. No. She goes, lemme tell you how shit it is being an artist
who doesn't make money and what actually happens on the other side or the, You Know, before the
precursor to success, you can't afford anything. You don't know what your life's gonna be and you don't have
healthcare. Yep. And If you don't have healthcare in America, you're screwed. You Know what I Mean? So
now in a way, she's touching on like the Luigi Mangione of it all. And people are like, oh yeah, healthcare,
we're screwed in this country. And then Alicia

2 (16m 20s):
With, with DEI.

1 (16m 21s):
Yeah. Then Doche gets on, oh yeah. Deci. And then Doche goes, it's a celebratory thing. But then Doche
gives you a reminder. She's like, yo, If you are a dark skinned black woman, you are seen as aggressive.
You are seen as wrong. You are seen as loud. And you, so again, people are cheering, but they're like, oh
yeah, shit. What a ch And then Alicia Keys comes on and she goes, Hey, we do need diversity. We want
everyone in the same room. We want people together. We want to create. So you realize that everyone
walked into a room with something on their minds other than awards and music, which is rare for the awards
and music. Like, the last time I think this probably happened was maybe when Kobe died. Right. And that we
weren't doing the Grammys, that type. But it was like literally night before the Grammys or the day of or
something.

1 (17m 4s):
It's like, no,

2 (17m 4s):
I was actually, I was funnily enough involved in that.

1 (17m 6s):
You were involved in that one.

2 (17m 7s):
Yeah. So I had been given the job that I have now, I was given the job as executive producer of the
Grammys. Oh damn. But what I said is, I I, I wanted to go for a year and not be number one. So I went and I
was the pre, I was a producer on that show. Oh wow. Essentially being like the number two on it, shadowing
Ken Ehrlich, who was the producer. Because I wanted to know like how to do it. 'cause that's a beast of a
show. And I, it's massive. And also you can't just get the job and your first time being the producer of it is
being the like, showrunner of

1 (17m 34s):
It. Okay. Yeah. That makes sense. So I

2 (17m 35s):
Went for two years. I did the Alicia Keys one because they'd penciled me and they, they knew that I was
gonna be it. So Okay. Got, I Mean, listen, if somebody says, oh, you're gonna go and like, help out the
producers at the Grammys and you're taking this thing over, you are gonna go. So it was the morning of, it
was just before the dress run started. Right. It was 10 o'clock in the morning we heard. And I went into

Alicia's dressing room and I sat with her and I said, listen, just so You Know, we just heard the news that
Kobe's died. And she was totally shocked. And I think she had the idea that we should go and find Boys to
men and see it. 'cause they were in the building for some reason and maybe they were nominate, whatever.
Right. Right. And so we had that idea. And then I had the idea to black out all the other shirts. Oh

1 (18m 12s):
Yeah. Because You Know, in the rafters. Yeah. In

2 (18m 14s):
The rafters. And so we did a shot of that. But it was, it was Ken Erlich was exec producer, but I I was there
that day. But you are right. It was one of the, but it seems like with the Grammys, well before our time
Whitney dies. Yeah. They call

1 (18m 25s):
It the Grammy's curse. I Mean,

2 (18m 26s):
Whitney dies and then it happens. We've had, we've had Kobe in the house that he built at Staples Center.
Obviously we did two during Covid, then we had the fires This time it's always a lot to handle. Yeah. It's
always a lot to handle. But then you are used to that in a way because you went on television every night
with the Daily Show and you'd have a script that would be funny. And then you'd have to chuck it out 'cause
there'd be a shooting somewhere. So didn't that give you the, like, the experience of doing that? Or Do you
think it's so different? 'cause it's a one-off event like that.

1 (18m 53s):
Okay. So it's similar in some ways and then in other ways it's, it's, it's a lot harder and a lot different. And I'll,
I'll, I'll tell you, I'll tell you. Let, let's take a break and then right after that I'll, I'll explain what I Mean. We're
gonna continue this conversation right after this short break.

Ultra Running (19m 11s):
This episode is brought to you by Ultra running Ultra mix performance running shoes that are insanely
comfortable with a Roomi toe box and zero to low drop. This helps keep your feet in a more natural position
so you can move how you were designed to perfect for the road trail or gym. You could wear them for miles
and forget that they're there. Stay out there with Ultra, try Ultra for yourself with a free 30 day trial and free
shipping@ultrarunning.com,

1 (19m 44s):
Doing the Daily Show. And you, you understand this feeling 'cause you were doing the Late, late show with
Cordon. I was One of the worst days, not just for the show, but for people was whenever there was a mass

tragedy, You Know, which would unfortunately happen all too often in America. So it would be mass
shooting, mass shooting, mass shooting. This happened. You Know what, it was always something like that.
And those days were tough. However, the Grammys is exponentially tougher because everyone coming to
the Daily Show was coming to engage in Trevor Noah's opinion of the world. Yeah. Or the show's processing
of the world with the correspondence and everyone else. And you, so it's, it's, it was like in a weird way, it's
like we all coming to the same church, we all have the same religion and now we're just gonna process what
has happened to us as people.

1 (20m 33s):
Right. And this year, like I realized that more than most years, the Grammys is the perfect coming together
of strangers. And it's something we don't have in society anymore. Right. You have someone walking to the
building who lives in Miami full time. They're only here because their record label or their company brought
them or, but they live in Miami. You've got someone who comes from London, you've got somebody who
comes in from Finland and they're like an engineer and they're phenomenal. But like, nobody knows them
except in the music industry. You got people from New York, you got, you got people from every, Nashville
has a whole, yeah. Nashville has a whole contingency. Right. But then you even break it up about amongst
like, genres and ideas. You Know, there's a joke you saw the joke I made at the top when I go like Master.

1 (21m 17s):
And then I was like, Oscar black friends. Because I know the whole chunk of the room is like, what was that
like? What, what was that? Well, what is happening here? Yeah. And its difficulty is, I think the thing that
makes it beautiful, it's like, it, it comes with a precariousness. But I also enjoy the fact that somebody who
only listens to hip hop is now gonna hear a country artist for the first time. Somebody who only listens to pop
is gonna hear a rock artist for the first time. Somebody, I think there's a greater cross pollination of fans in
music at the Grammys than in any other instance. 'cause 'cause when else are you forced in a good way to
engage in somebody else's ideas? Now for me as the host, it becomes extra hard because comedy is
extremely subjective.

1 (22m 1s):
And comedy is like, people also have to come for comedy. Some people have come to the Grammys or
they're even like watching on TV and then they're like, yeah, get done with this. I'm, I'm, I'm here for
Beyonce. Yeah. Who is this guy? Yba, YBA. Yba Yba. Come on, come on, come on, come on. Get, and I
know this, I know this as well. You Know, that's, that's the job of the host. You're like moving things along.
Right. But it becomes harder because it's not a funeral. But there's been huge devastation. It's not a comedy
show, but people do wanna laugh. Yeah. You Know, it's an award show, but it's also a a a somber night in
many ways. It's all these things are happening. So it's much harder. 'cause with the Daily Show, at the end
of the day, I would go, you are at The Daily Show?

1 (22m 42s):

I'm at The Daily Show. Welcome to The Daily Show.

2 (22m 45s):
And it's about the Daily Show.

1 (22m 47s):
Lemme lemme tell you, when I about the news, lemme tell you, when I knew how different the Grammy's
was, this isn't like a long ago story. Four or five weeks ago, I was in a restaurant in New York. I was having
like lunch or something and the manager of the restaurant walked over and went, Hey Trevor,
congratulations on hosting the Grammys. What an amazing, wow. This is gonna be great for you in your
career. I was like, thank you. And he's like, man, are you nervous like doing this for the first time? It's gonna
be crazy. And I paused and I was like, oh. And then the person I was having the, the lunch with, very sweet.
But he leaned and he's like, what? It's not his first time. It's his second time.

1 (23m 30s):
And that's what I realized that like, and not even realized, I've, I've always known this, the Grammys is not
about me, nor am I, You know me, I'm not trying to make it about me. No. I'm trying to keep the show moving
and I'm trying to stitch things together. But there are people who are coming for their person and if their
person's not there, they're not coming. Yeah. So they're a fan of this artist. If artist is not there, they're not
watching. You Know? And so I am just this random person who pops into people's lives Yeah. And tries to
stitch together an incoherent group of people that you, in my opinion, and I'll I'll say this to you before we
forget masterfully put it together. This, I've been to, I've been to five Grammys now. Lemme tell you
something, Ben. The way you stitch, like, just like the best new artists, You Know, everyone going from
Benson Boone, You Know, going over to Doci, going over to Teddy swims, going over to Ray Yo.

1 (24m 24s):
Like, even that is that, that's hard because it's all different people doing different things. And yet you created
a cohesive vibe that, that's, that's what keeps bringing me back to the Grammys. Well,

2 (24m 35s):
A couple of things. Firstly, I it's, it's really funny that you say that. 'cause when you say about the show and
how difficult it is for you going or people are here for different reasons. Yeah. I think about that in the way I
program the show all the time. Because I'm perfectly aware that like Auntie Marilyn in Nebraska Yeah. Does
not wanna watch Doce. And in the same way that like, somebody who loves Doce is not interested in Lainey
Wilson. Yeah. It's like, so that's partly why we've done as much as we can to like, make the show something
for everybody. I would like the videos that we explain who everybody is and I would even

1 (25m 7s):
Really try tell stories. But I I would even interject and say, it's not that they don't want to, they don't know that

they

2 (25m 11s):
Don't want, they don't know it. Yeah. Yeah. But you, but we try and make it like a show that everybody would
enjoy from beginning to end. I think you under, I think you under mine, not under mine. That's the wrong
word. I think you under serve the purpose that you have in that show. And, and, and like cordon, I, I got
involved in the Grammys 'cause of James Cordon. So obviously I was his, I, I am his partner and I was his
show runner for late late show with Rob,

1 (25m 35s):
Business partner by the way. Not married.

2 (25m 36s):
Yeah. We're not married. We're not married

1 (25m 38s):
People. No, no. 'cause you're right, people say words that mean other things all the time. Yeah. Right. And
then some be like, wow, James Corden's married to this guy. I didn't know, I didn't know James Cord was
even gay. And then, then it's a whole thing. And then it's like, it's like when Kendrick said very, a successful
couple when Kendrick said my aunt transitioned a few days ago. Yes. And then I could feel the room go wait,
Kendrick's aunt just transitioned. And then most of the black people were like, we know what he meant. He
meant passed away. Yeah. But then I saw a lot of white people be like, he's got an uncle. What? Yeah.
Literally like, so I Mean, and he actually does Funny enough. Yeah. Yo man, it was very confusing. So I just
wanted to throw that in. Yes,

2 (26m 12s):
I do love him, but he is not my lover. Yes. So I only got involved in the Grammys because he got asked to
host it. So I went along to be his like host producer. Got it, got it, got it. And that's when the recording
academy got to know me and that's when like CBS and the recording Academy said,

1 (26m 26s):
Would you ever,

2 (26m 27s):
Then he's decided he wasn't gonna do the Grammys anymore. Alicia Keys got appointed and they said to
me, Ken is, You Know, however old he is, I think he was, You Know, 70 odd, 80 or whatever. They said,
would you ever consider it? He'd run it 40 years. I was like, and that's how this all happened. But James or
used to say something that, I wonder If you feel James used to say the morning after the Grammys, and I'll
never forget it. He always used to say the thing, I don't understand why I do this, is if it goes badly, it's career

suicide. Yes you are. Yes. You are a joke. You are over, you are rubbish. Yeah. You can never work again. It's
a disaster. If it goes well, you get 12 lovely emails, you get 12 lovely emails.

2 (27m 7s):
And he's like, he's like, why, why do I, I don't need 12 lovely emails. I don't do. But like, he also did it for the
buzz and the love of it and the excitement. And for you, I I genuinely, the biggest panic I had this year was in
regards to you. I Mean, and I dunno if You Know this, I genuinely could not have done the show this year
without you. I couldn't have done it without you. It was such a high wire act because loads of people said we
shouldn't do the show. Like, loads of people were like, cancel the Grammys do better. Yeah. Yeah. Like
what's her name? The amazing actress from Hacks. Jean Smart. Yeah. She said, cancel all award shows
and give the money to fire relief or whatever. Yeah. It's like there was this real like, and everyone was like,
why are you doing this is not about people picking up gold statues and all this.

2 (27m 51s):
So there was this huge attention on us and everyone was going, you're canceling it. Right. You're canceling
it. I really didn't wanna cancel it for many reasons. One, I thought we could do real good on the night. Two. I
thought it's three and a half weeks away. And actually like, well we were deep in the fire. It's three and a half
weeks away if the fires are still raging. Wait, wait,

1 (28m 8s):
Wait. But you, you had been evacuated from your own home and you were still like, I think we can do

2 (28m 11s):
The show. A hundred percent wanted to do it more than ever. Okay. What people don't realize, and I'm
going, I'm gonna come back to the bit by you in a second. Okay. Okay. But what people don't realize and
why I was annoyed, but I don't get annoyed much, You Know that. Yeah, no you don't. When people were
like, they should just cancel it. I was like going, we did the, the math on this. 6,500 people all from Los
Angeles in some ways take a wage from the Grammys happening. I'm not talking about Sabrina Carpenter
and Chap Row. No, I'm talking about the people who build the stages, the caterers, the producers, the
writers, the choreographers. That's how many people, the drivers. It's, it's insane. So all these people saying
to, and a lot of them lost their houses and a lot of 'em I know. Yeah. And the worst thing I could do to them,
the worst thing as the executive producer of the show, the single worst thing I could possibly do to any of
those people is go, Hey guys, because you guys are struggling right now.

2 (29m 1s):
And because, because you've lost your house. Yeah. And because you're having a really tough time, we've
decided to take your wage away. Okay. Just to make things a bit easier for you so that you don't need to
work right now. Okay. I hope that makes you feel good. You Know, we are really with you. Heart's with you. I
love LA What like, it was just, it just didn't understand. And then people were like, there was somebody from

Nashville who was gonna come to the show, big star. And they said their agent called and they said they
don't want to take hotel rooms in LA so we are no longer gonna be doing it because we don't, we think it's
inappropriate to take hotel rooms. I was like hotel rooms right now in Los Angeles, the week of the
Grammys. And actually that week, which was three weeks ago. Yeah.

2 (29m 41s):
We're at 32% capacity.

1 (29m 42s):
You Know what's funny? I said this to cwe. So cwe you flew in from, we were in South Africa. 'cause I Mean
we did the other podcast together. A few episodes. Yeah. Like now, basically a few weeks ago. So two
weeks ago. Yeah. We did the episode together. Then he flew and I said to him, I was shocked. I was like, LA
is empty, empty.

2 (30m 0s):
The

1 (30m 0s):
Airport is empty, empty. The flights coming in are empty, the hotels are empty, LA is empty. But

2 (30m 6s):
People are, they're

1 (30m 7s):
Like, oh. And then you said, sorry, sorry to interrupt you. No, no, no. I'm, you said to me, you were like, yo
man, LA's down. Like, you remember, 'cause you, you said something about like how everything is, you
noticed coming in first, the flights

3 (30m 15s):
Were extremely cheap or relatively cheap. Yeah. That's, I was compared Wass what they would've been like
this time year. That's what for sure. And then as you say, everything was fully available.

2 (30m 23s):
Everything was available because the hotels are empty. And so I've got an artist team from Nashville when I
live and love in a, I like love la now become proper.

1 (30m 31s):
I'm, yeah, I

2 (30m 32s):
Don't, no, I changed. We can talk about that too, but I can't get distracted. Let go.

1 (30m 35s):
Okay. Okay. Good. Go. Go.

2 (30m 36s):
So, so like, You Know, I feel very, when something like, like that happens, you become, you either go 2019,
there was a fire in my garden. It was Getty Center. We were evacuated. I thought everything was gone.
Yeah. It was fine. My house. But I was like, get me home to London. What the hell am I doing here in this
place that can burn my house down? I was like done this time. I dunno why entirely different. Maybe it's,
'cause I've got two kids now and two like two little Americans. Maybe it's just, I've grown in to love this
country. Maybe it's, I've just been here, this is my 11th year. But I just had this pride in our city. I was like, we
are gonna, it was really, it was this like resilience. Yeah. Like love for it. It's why we started with I level LA on
the show. It's why we did all the like local businesses.

2 (31m 17s):
It all came from that like heart of like what I feel like the

1 (31m 20s):
City. Yeah. You had, you had like a No,

2 (31m 22s):
I, I'm in it

1 (31m 23s):
Uncharacteristically. I say uncharacteristic 'cause like I always find like English people are resilient, but there
isn't like the same level of

2 (31m 31s):
Schmutz. Yeah,

1 (31m 33s):
Yeah.

2 (31m 33s):
No, I know it is. I've got, but

1 (31m 35s):

Now you have like a,

2 (31m 36s):
I Do you, I love this place. You're

1 (31m 37s):
Like my neighbors and we are getting together. We gotta mix and we gotta blankets to the people and we
gotta, it's like, yeah, like USA. That's what I'm waiting for.

2 (31m 44s):
Whoa, whoa, whoa,

1 (31m 45s):
Whoa.

2 (31m 47s):
I'm not chanting. SA guys

1 (31m 49s):
A few more years

2 (31m 50s):
I've started to get to know my neighbors. Few

1 (31m 52s):
More years out. Yeah. Four more years.

2 (31m 55s):
Make the Grammys great again guys. So, so, so then when this artist said, no, we're not gonna come, we're
put, You Know, we don't wanna come because, and they weren't, they weren't in the show anyway. Yeah.
They hadn't confirmed. But I was hoping to get them and they were like, no, we're gonna keep The Hotel
rooms free. And it was the idea that people who have been evacuated, either there is either they are not
wealthy enough to stay in a hotel for more than two or three nights. You think they're staying at the London
on Sunset Boulevard for like three months. Right. Like these, they can't, they don't have, they don't have any
possessions anymore. Or they're wealthy enough to rent a new place or move on to rent

1 (32m 30s):
The money of the economics of a hotel will just never work. Right. It's

2 (32m 33s):
Not gonna work. So the hotels are empty. Everybody knows that in this town bars aren't being used valets
like the whole thing. So that an annoyed me. So that's why I was like a friend of mine. Jeffrey, I'm gonna, I'm,
I hope he won't mind. Yeah. Jeffrey Katzenberg calls me literally while I'm evacuated and while everybody is
going, we dunno if the Grammy should happen. And me and Harvey, Harvey Mason Jr. Who runs the
recording Academy, who's employs me to produce the show, we were both like, we really think we can do
something good on this show. And Jeffrey called me and Jeffrey's like one of my favorite people in the world.
And he called me and he said like, why don't we think about doing something on television with musicians for
the fires. This was before fire aid had been announced, the Irvings thing. He said, I really think that you'll be
the right person to pull it together, get the artists, we could find a network.

2 (33m 16s):
We do the whole thing. And I said, I, I literally, I was in our hotel room with all my bags around me. I said,
Jeffrey, but to do that you'd need X million dollars to put on an event. I've already got X million dollars on
February the second, it's the Grammys. I, you'd also gonna need a network to like put it on. And I was like,
I've already got that. It's CBS. You'd also need people to watch it. And that's hard. But it's called the
Grammy. So people will watch it. And you'd also need to get Beyonce and Taylor and Billy and Gaga and
Bruno and Olivia. Rod Juga in a room. Yeah. And I've already got that. It's called the Grammys. I was like,
why would we do something for that? Why not just make this that? And, and that's what like we needed to
do. And it was a crazy highwire act for you to do.

2 (33m 58s):
'cause at the one time you're going, please welcome Sabrina Carpenter. But the other time you're saying, go
to this QR code and help these people. Yeah. And, and I think it's, it was an impossible job that you did
unbelievably. Unbelievably well and you, so much so that I want you to know something that I only found out
about an hour ago during the telecast. Yeah. Just during the telecast there was donations of over eight and a
half million dollars. Altogether. It's been nine, just over nine. It's 24 million for all the weekends events at the
Grammy's. Wow. Wow. But just during the telecast is 9 million is eight and a half million. What is fascinating
about that, that I literally just found out a minute ago in my office is the average donation of that was Less
than 50 bucks. So what happened was the biggest donation from people at home was a 30, then it was a 10
and then it was a five.

2 (34m 43s):
That's the three donations. Everything else was beneath that level. Wow. Which, what that means is
hundreds of thousands of people were watching the show and watching you go, there's a QR code. Yeah.
And they were donating in 5, 10, 20 enough that we raised 8 million just from those donations. That's
because you'd think If you raise 8 million, that's a hundred grand. That's half a million. Of course. You Know,
like, but that's not no corporate sponsors. That's not including the artists. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That add up to
that 24. It's just people at home. And like that's because you successfully, and I'm not just blowing smoke up

your ass. I I but like that's because you successfully and like seismically changed like people to do that.

2 (35m 27s):
People to go up to their screen and get their phone and then type in a code rather than just watching TV and
enjoying the Grammys. That's 'cause you did it really well. And so it was a high wire act. But I knew that I
needed you hugely because without you, it would've been impossible to get the excitement and the joy and
allow somebody to stand there and win a Grammy to also have someone who loves and understands music.
Yeah. But fundamentally to get the tone right. So that we could go from I love LA or the firemen coming on
stage or the commercials for the businesses or all the other, or the, or the choir that sung with Stevie
Wonder from schools that burned down. All those bits that we'd come up with. Yeah. You had to get us
through them and at the same time make a joke about Yeah. I don't know. Alligator bites. Right. Right. And
that was needed.

2 (36m 8s):
So my big, I've talked for too long, I'm sorry, but

1 (36m 11s):
No, what Do you mean this is the podcast but we have some other Grammys. You're the Grammy's guy.
What Do you mean?

2 (36m 14s):
But I freaked out. Do you not know this? I

1 (36m 17s):
Don't know anything. I, I'm, I'm waiting to hear

2 (36m 19s):
It. Alright. So it was the week of the fires. Yeah. Which was January the seventh or eighth. And me and
Harvey are, and with Raj and Jesse who are also, I should credit them, they're also execs on the show. We
decided we're gonna go ahead with the show. So we make this announcement, we're going ahead with the
show and I'm like, great, we're going ahead. And I start planning it and I start thinking of all these ideas and
I'm like, and then Trevor can do this and like, oh, and then Trevor could start like this and then he could like
unveil the photo of doors. And I'm just thinking of all of it and like, really, and I'm phoning all the artists.
'cause they all want to know that it's gonna be okay. Yeah. Yeah. They all want to know that they're not
walking into like, so I, I went round each one. Not each one of them, not all of them, but like a lot of them
like, wanted a call to understand what we were doing.

2 (37m 1s):
Yeah. And I reassured them instantly and they could feel, oh, there's love here and like it's gonna be okay.

And it got to like the 12th of January or 13th of January, I dunno the exact dates. But it was like, You Know,
and Eric Cook, the co ep who sort of runs the budget, comes into my office and he says, he says, when we
still haven't got Trevor's contract signed, when are you announcing Trevor? And I went, I went,

1 (37m 32s):
Hold on,

2 (37m 34s):
We haven't announced Trevor. And he's like, no. I was like, why haven't we announced Trevor? He's like, I
dunno, we've never announced Trevor. I was like, I had no idea We hadn't announced you as the host
because we, you and I are I was saying very close friends. Yes. Yeah. And I just, we just assume we're doing
it together.

1 (37m 49s):
Hey man, we're just, I, I don't even, so here's a funny thing about me though. Assume is he No, but no, but
here's a funny thing. I'm the opposite. Cesar will even tell you this. I don't assume anything. So even when
they ask me, are you doing the Grammys? I say, and it's the truth. I go, they'll let me know if they want me.
But until then I'm

2 (38m 8s):
No. But we did have a con. No, but we'd already had about stage. No, but

1 (38m 10s):
What I'm is with the fires and I'm saying with all of the, so I'm still going like, Hey man, I don't, and this, this
guy's known me. We are on like 20 something years now. Yeah. Cesar knows me. I take nothing for granted.
I always assume that I will be fired or can be fired. Right. Anything in life can change. And I don't even have
like, I'm like baby faced with most things. Yeah. You

2 (38m 28s):
Don't. Okay. I turn

1 (38m 29s):
Around and I go You are, you're

2 (38m 30s):
Very well.

1 (38m 31s):
You walk ahead. So for me, I was just sitting in South Africa literally just being like, man, this is crazy. As the

Grammy's happening or, but I, I don't even assume that I'm doing it even though we've spoken. 'cause I
know you might call me and say, Hey listen, this year is different. We're gonna do a different thing. And so
Oh yeah. I'm like, okay.

2 (38m 46s):
But I have in my head designed an entire show. Yeah.

1 (38m 50s):
Which I didn't know by way

2 (38m 51s):
Based with you at the helm. Right. Every element of it from like the Gen Z commercial joke, I'd already got
like a bit of that. Like the, the whole idea of like everything was with you In my head it wasn't, it didn't cross
my mind for a second. You weren't doing the show. And then Eric went, well no, we haven't announced him.
So I was like, so I had this cold sweat come over my body. It was about, it was about like, You Know, it must
have been really early in the morning. 'cause I remember, so then it, it was nine o'clock. That's right. So I call
you 'cause I'm panicking a little bit and it goes straight to answer phone. Then I called Rachel Rush, who's
your agent? And it rang Rachel Rush never doesn't pick up me. No,

1 (39m 30s):
It it, it's Insta Pick.

2 (39m 31s):
It's Insta Pick. She picks up instantly and we've just announced we're definitely going ahead with the
Grammys rings and rings and rings. No texts going, I'll call you back. So then I call, then I call your manager
Norm. Nothing. Wow. Literally nothing. No one picks up.

1 (39m 47s):
Dog is getting Sno.

2 (39m 49s):
I'm like, I am like heavy breathing. So then I'm like so funny. Alright. I haven't got Rachel, I haven't got
Trevor, I haven't got Norm. Derek will pick up, Derek will pick up. So then Derek, I pick, I ring him nothing.
Five minutes later on Zoom. Can I call back later in the day? That's far too formal for me. Derek.

1 (40m 9s):
That is,

2 (40m 10s):

That is far too formal.

1 (40m 12s):
Oh

2 (40m 12s):
Man. Then Rachel Rush texts me, oh man. And goes, this is funny. Rachel Rush texts me. This is now like 9
45. Rachel Rush takes me going, sorry, sorry. I had a missed call being in meetings. We'll make sure we
speak later in the day. And I am like, so I try you again. I try you again. I'm like, oh my God. Try you again.
No answer. These are four people who I know your listeners wouldn't necessarily know, but four people who
pick up my call. Yes. And like are friends of

1 (40m 38s):
Mine. And what's what's funny is what I'm experiencing just from, 'cause I don't know anyone else's story,
but for me, when this was all happening, I was in South Africa and I specifically decided that I'm gonna take
some time away from digital devices. And, and I like made a whole thing. And I was like, then I wrote to one
of my friends, I said to, I said to one of my friends, I was like, Hey, I'm, I think I, I'm gonna send this out as
sort of an out of office to everyone. Just to be like, Hey, I'm staying away from my phone. If you, then he was
like, calm down. He's like, you're not a doctor, you're not a lawyer. Nobody needs you like that dude. And
then he said, if someone needs to get ahold of you, they'll find you through your people. So relax. So I was
like, all right. Literally my phone for maybe 10 days was just maybe look in the morning.

1 (41m 18s):
Oh man, maybe look at night. And that was it.

2 (41m 20s):
Well I was having an utter freak

1 (41m 21s):
Out. I'm sorry. My phone.

2 (41m 22s):
So, so, so, so I'm also going, all four of them are on a Zoom right now. It's nine in the morning. They've read
the announcement going their head, they're discuss this and they are discussing how Trevor thinks. It's not a
good idea. And I'm also annoyed at myself, genuinely annoyed at myself. And it was bad producing. I did, I
made an id made, I made a genuine mistake being serious. I actually learned from this. And you don't even
know about it. The i in my head, I think of us as kind of a unit. Like I in a lovely way. Yeah. I'm with you in
that. Like I just thought I Trevor will be fine with all of this. Right. Okay. And I'm, and this is great and I was so
annoyed at myself that we had made an announcement, not with your name in it, that the Grammys was

happening and I hadn't picked up the phone you and gone. Do you think that's all right? Is that okay with
you?

2 (42m 2s):
Will you still do it? Because If you had said, I don't want to do it, I don't think I would've gone ahead and I I
we might have gone ahead. I'm not saying you bigger than, bigger than the Grammy. I what you're but no I
what said Harvey? I need to find a host that can manage what we're about to That's do ing before we go
ahead. I can't, we can't announce we're doing it until I know who's gonna be the voice of like our ideas and
our vision and whatever. And I was so angry at myself. 'cause it's a real bull drop for me. And I, and as you'll
know, I'm like quite

1 (42m 27s):
Detailed. I I had no emotion. Good. So I was I'm sorry that you went through all of this.

2 (42m 30s):
So I called a meeting, I was staff, I was skipping staff. I was skipping through the grass. Yeah. He is got

1 (42m 34s):
Enjoying a mountain. Where

2 (42m 35s):
The hell are Norm? Derek and Rachel. So I called a meeting with my staff with Patrick and, and Raj and we
called in and they all knew it was about 10 30 that morning. I said, I've got, I I've just got something in my
stomach I have to share with all of you. Trevor's out, I think Trevor's out. No, I swear to God the room, it was
the most morbid room. Everyone was like, oh my God. I was like, I've, I said I've effed up. I was like, I didn't,
I dunno what's happened. I I might be able to talk him back in. I was spiraling. I dunno what was going on
with me. I'm this like

1 (43m 7s):
Outta of character is very outta

2 (43m 8s):
Character. I was so, but I was like, there was so much at stake for me with this show. Okay, this makes, that
makes sense. I put my heart and soul into this Grammy's. I partly because like I love the Grammys now I've
just decided it's like, it's my baby now. Yeah. I've done it five years and I love it. And I love the love it gets.
And, and I love, I'm a proper music fan, so I love that. And I just like telly and the challenge of it. And I've,
and the LA thing evacuated

1 (43m 27s):

Now it's home and fighting for

2 (43m 29s):
His money. Yeah. And I was like, this is so idiotic. I Mean, I haven't checked room anyway. No one takes me
back still. It's now like 1130 and no one has called me. So I know I'm screwed because no one's called me
back. And it's, and it's like, you've

1 (43m 42s):
Gotta admit, that does sound very weird, bad. It does

2 (43m 44s):
Sound weird. It, it's bad. It's bad. And I'm like, and I, and maybe they're annoyed I didn't check and
whatever. And I knew that like Norman had friends who'd lost houses and stuff. Yeah. And he was, yeah.
Yeah. So they were all probably like, we shouldn't do the show. And Rachel's a very sensitive person as well,
so she might have thought, I could see how all of them could say to you in some way, I could see how all of
them could go, no, I'm not sure it is the right thing for you right now. I could see the zoom that I wasn't on at
9:00 AM that didn't

1 (44m 6s):
Exist.

2 (44m 8s):
So then my phone goes, everyone's in the room, it's about midday. My phone goes and it says Trevor Noah.
I'm like,

1 (44m 15s):
Oh fuck.

2 (44m 17s):
For the first time I'm, it was like a, it was like a girlfriend telling me If I was gonna get a second date. I, I
became this pathetic kid. So I'm like, okay guys, guys, give me the room. Give me the room, give me the
room. Everyone give me the room. You Know? So everyone falls out the room going, good luck, good luck,
good luck.

1 (44m 32s):
And I'm like,

2 (44m 33s):
And I'm literally like, hello, hello. Hi. Hi, hi. Hi. Don't just be strong. Hello. Like, okay, pick up the phone.

1 (44m 41s):
You

2 (44m 42s):
Within a mi. I was like, Hey man, how are you? You're like, good. I'm just in South Africa. How you doing? I
was like, I'm good. Everything okay with you? Yeah. Just having a break with my, and literally I was like, what
an idiot am I, I've spent the whole morning crying over this disaster. No.

1 (45m 1s):
And I was like, I just, I didn't know there was a disaster. And

2 (45m 2s):
I, when your soak, I was pretending to be so cool. I've never been as uncle in my life. And I was like, so I've
got a few ideas for the, You Know, the Grammys, at some point we should talk about it. You're like, yeah,
yeah. At some point we should just, yeah. Whenever, like, You Know, I'm around. I'm back in LA next week,
let's talk then.

1 (45m 17s):
Sure.

2 (45m 18s):
Yeah. No, absolutely.

3 (45m 19s):
Oh, that's funny.

1 (45m 21s):
Meanwhile, we had the opposite. 'cause obviously the fires happened. Yeah. Now we are wondering what's
gonna happen. How are you gonna do it? How are people gonna do it? Everyone's trying to figure out the
semblance of normalcy that they can attain during a disaster like this. And then you and I spoke

3 (45m 36s):
You initially, we, we thought they were gonna get canceled. Yeah.

1 (45m 38s):
We thought it was gonna get canceled. And then it was you who said to me, you had like no doubt in Ben
being able to pull it off. Funny enough,

3 (45m 44s):
I didn't have a doubt. And it's for two reasons. Right. So I've obviously, I've worked with you guys for like four
years now. Seen how you guys do your thing. And I know the chemistry you have, right? Hmm. The first time
in Vegas. I was familiar with your work. Yeah. But I obviously had never seen you deliver. And after that year,
I even told him, I said, this is the right person for you. Like, I've never seen an on air chemistry like what you
guys have. And I'm not even saying this. 'cause you Yeah. Right. Like he he'll know. So when you got
decided, you put out the announcement even on Instagram. And funny enough, I sent you a DM and my
response was like a fire emoji, which I then thought, well, I probably shouldn.

1 (46m 23s):
That's the wrong, shouldn't have done that. That's the wrong

2 (46m 25s):
Emoji. I was sat in my house with two hoses, but I appreciate it.

3 (46m 28s):
Yeah. But I was a hundred percent sure you'd be able to pull it off. I just knew that the tone of the show
would've to be different For sure. Which is what we initially discussed. Yeah. And then everything from that
point on,

2 (46m 41s):
Did you ever was, so my instinct was obviously wrong, as in like, you hadn't, you weren't pulling out. No. But
did you ever consider, actually, maybe I shouldn't be hosting it this year. I don't. Or I don't want the challenge
of it this year. Or, You Know what, maybe this isn't for me. Did it cross your mind at any point? Or you were
just as easy going as you made that to me on the phone.

1 (46m 60s):
Okay. Let's, let's take a break. I'll think about it. I'll think about it and then I'll, I'll I'll give you the answer to
that.

ZipRecruiter (47m 10s):
So I wanna take a moment to talk about ZipRecruiter. No matter what job you're searching for or hiring for,
ZipRecruiter can help. Today we're talking about the Grammys. And If you just think about a show like that,
it's incredible the number of very specific jobs that go into putting it all together. You Know, it's actually funny,
speaking of jobs, you and I basically met through jobs. Yep. Right? And you and I met on a production set,
basically like I was doing, You Know, the kids show you were doing, what were you doing at the time?
M-T-V-M-T-V Stuff. Yeah. Yeah. So you're doing MTV and so you go there day one. What Do you expect?
Well, I didn't really have an expectation. 'cause how I got my job was via like an open audition. Yeah. So
literally everything was a learning experience. And just, You Know, okay, what Do you do? Then they'll tell

you, then you move on. Okay, what Do you do? What's your role? How does it all fit together to then create
the big production? That's Probably the most mind blowing part of a production, is how many people need to
come together to make it happen. Yeah. Like I speak to people all the time who will say to me, Hey, Trevor, I
wanna work in entertainment. Then I go, doing what? And they're like, what Do you mean doing what? I'm
like doing what? There's literally everything in entertainment. You Know, I remember when I discovered
there's somebody whose job it is to make sure that the cables that are on the cameras don't get tangled up
because the cable baher yo. And like, that's one of the most important people on the job. Like running along
the, the sidelines at the NFL or, You Know, at a live show like the Grammys, or you name it. Like, that
person's job is just to make sure that the cables don't get tangled so that you at home don't miss the shot.
You Know, I've always wondered what's the first boy grip? I've always read that since I was a kid. You Know,
I was like, I wonder what a first boy grip is. Like, what is that? It's the grip that is most important. That's My
first boy. Amen. This, this is why you need like, hiring side. 'cause I, I Mean, how many jobs are there? Do
You Know what I mean? Like, think about it. Everyone thinks of a cameraman. Yeah. When a movie's being
made or when a show's being like created on live tv. Do You Know how many different people are making
that camera work? You Know what I Mean? You watch something, you think two people were having a
conversation, you don't know behind them. There were 200 people making it look like it was just two people
having a conversation. And all of those roles need people And they need to be filled. You need to know
where to go and find them. And that's where ZipRecruiter comes in every day. ZipRecruiter helps 10 million
candidates with their job search, which means no matter the role or industry, they can help your business
find qualified candidates fast. And when they say, no matter the role or industry, they really mean it. Whether
you need to find that one person, that one employee for your small business or staff for a big event, you can
see for yourself by going to ZipRecruiter dot com slash Trevor. With smart matching technology and handy
tools like the invites to apply feature, you'll find a potential hire in no time. ZipRecruiter is the hiring site
employers prefer most based on G two. In fact, four out of five employers who post on ZipRecruiter get a
quality candidate within the first day. See for yourself. Try it now for free at ZipRecruiter dot com slash
Trevor. That's ZipRecruiter dot com slash T-R-E-V-O-R. ZipRecruiter, the smartest way to hire.

1 (50m 29s):
Okay, so 2024 is coming to a close. I've been on tour almost for two years. This is like me finally wrapping
things up. I put on a few extra shows in New York at the Beacon, the Comedy Cellar at a, a little theater
downtown at the Soho Theater. And then I decided I'm gonna go to South Africa for Christmas. I'm gonna go
spend time with my mom. And then I'll spend New Year's in South Africa in Johannesburg, which I don't
regularly do with my friends. Czu and nearly everyone. We normally travel. And then I decide, You Know
what? I'm just gonna spend time at home doing like nothing and just chill. Just get back to home vibes. So
I'm home.

1 (51m 9s):
I'm home, I'm home. Having a wonderful time While we are there. The news comes out about LA and it's the
same news that always comes out every year. There are wildfires in la Now, it's not diminished by the fact

that it always happens, but you, you always think to yourself, oh yeah, they got it, man. They always, they
always got it. It can get a little outta hand, but they've got it. They've got it, they've got it. Then the fires grow,
then the fires grow. They keep growing, they keep growing. Now you hear about evacuation orders, and now
we are reading this second hand. We're not in la You Know, so all you get is the news clip slash a few videos
online. Then the fires jump, then the fires expand. Then now we are like, wow, it looks like the whole city's
burned. Now personal friends start texting me, or even like my manager and my agent, Matt Blake, literally
his house gone like, gone, gone ashes.

1 (51m 57s):
Sorry. No, but you, so now you start getting direct people going, Hey man, how's gone? Hey, how's gone?
Hey, how's gone? And now you're like, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait everyone, how far is this thing getting now?
You're like, oh, everyone is gonna be involved in this. It's not, it's not, it's not like a few people who live near
to the boundary, which is normally how it is. It's everyone. So I'm experiencing this, but it's not about me. So
I'm just like, I hope everyone's okay. And whenever there's a tragedy, I hate being the person who's texting
people because I feel like I don't need you to reply to my text while shit's going wrong in your life. So I'll text
you afterwards. 'cause my text doesn't necessarily help you. You Know what I Mean? So I'm, I'm quiet, I'm
spending time off my devices. We go, we see things are being canceled, moved, et cetera.

1 (52m 38s):
I go, Cesar, what Do you think is gonna happen? He's like, I don't know, but if You Know, if anything
happened, they'll let You Know. I'm like, all right, we'll see. Are the Grammys still happening? We don't know.
We don't know. We don't know. Grammys gets announced. The Grammys are happening, but they say
nothing about me. So I'm like, oh, okay. I guess there's gonna be a shift. It's fine. Then I go, Cesar, you saw
the Grammys happening? Cesary goes instantly. He's like, yeah. He's like, Ben can pull it off. I know he can.
He always, he'll figure it out. He, he always pulls it off. So I'm like, I, I'm like, yeah. I'm like, Ben will do. I
don't know how he's gonna do it, but he'll do something cool and I'm fine. I'm just living my, like, we speak on
the phone. The only doubts I had were doubts around. So I'll start with this number one to what James said,
and what anyone who's hosted an award show will know.

1 (53m 24s):
You Know, like, I remember like talking to Kevin Hart about it. I've talked to Chris Rock about it, you name it.
Hosting a show is one of the more thankless things you can do. Yeah. Right. And not thankless, like, oh, I
need the thanks. But it's just because it's such a high wire act, even If there's nothing bad happening in the
world, you step onto a stage where people haven't come for you and you then do the thing that you do,
which is already precarious. Comedy is not a safe art form. Full stop. Like just even people who are coming
to a comedy club, there's a possibility that comedy doesn't go the way they want it to for a comedian.

1 (54m 4s):
It's not a safe art form. No. Comedian's like, ah, what a lovely, easy job I have. Right? So you start with that

then an award show where people are coming for music is not even like the Emmys and the Oscars where
people are, You Know, used to sitting down, having people talk all night. No, the music speaks at the
Grammys. You Know, there's very little speaking at the Grammys. So I I I, I have my latent doubts about
doing the Grammys. I roll to the Grammys 'cause of you. You Know what I Mean? This literally from the
beginning, I was like, look, I don't like award shows. I would never do an award show, but I roll with you and I
trust you to keep me safe and to try and put the best show on. And I love making people feel good. Mm.
Now the fires are happening.

1 (54m 45s):
I go, okay, so I've already got the doubts I had, but now what Do you, are you throwing a party while
everyone's having a funeral? What are you doing? How, how bad is the devastation? Are you assuming
devastation on their behalf? Because that's another thing I've realized we do quite a lot in society these
days, is we assume things on other people's be halves that they themselves aren't experiencing. Babyface is
a good example. Babyface wasn't pissed off. People were pissed off. How dare you? But the man that you
are daring on behalf of is like, nah, I get it, man. It's part of the game. Relax. People get offended on, You
Know, place is behalf people get offended. People, we, we do that and sometimes we do it. I think most of
the time we try and do it out of good, but the intention doesn't match up with the, with the outcome.

1 (55m 27s):
Right. So I, I didn't wanna make the assumption and be like, no, I cannot do the Grammys at this tough time.
I cannot. Then it's like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. What, what about the people who've worked for a year on
their music? What about the people who've like prepared for a year to work on the Grammys? What about
the people? And I spend most of my time with these guys. I'm chatting to, You Know, the, the stage hand
backstage. I'm being ushered around, You Know, by, by the crew. I'm, I'm building bonds with the, the
cameraman because you, You Know what it's like Cesar, when you've hosted, that's the thing. These are the
people that you're doing most of it with. So I'm not in the position to assume anything. I just go, I will work
with what is given to me.

1 (56m 9s):
But what I thought from the get go, even when I came to LA was, man, this is gonna be hard. And this is
gonna be hard because half the people who are here have a feeling of sadness that they're carrying. It's
mixed in with resilience, but it's still sadness. The other half have some sort of reverence for what everyone
is experiencing. But they've come into town, but they also don't wanna be the people with confetti and
streamers. So every normal pre Grammy party was canceled. Every after party was canceled. Yeah. There
was no Spotify party. There was no CAA party. There was no Warner Music party.

1 (56m 50s):
There. There's nothing, there's nothing. So the preamble feels different. People feel different. You Know,
you, the first time you're gonna put something nice on, it's just to go to the show. That's, that's not usual. And

then on top of that, you realize that the audience isn't having the same feelings depending on where they
are. Someone's watching in South Africa. Yep. They're not having the same feeling. Right. That's
somebody's watching in London. They're not having the same feeling. They're happy for Ray, You Know, and
then someone's watching from Australia and then someone's watching from, but these people are like, oh
yeah, yeah, we know that there is a fire. But also when we had a fire, you didn't do the thing. So we are
having a different feeling and, and I, I was watching this online, I was seeing people, so I didn't, I didn't
assume anything, but I knew for me personally, I was like, this is probably gonna be my least favorite
Grammys, because whatever happens, I will be doing something wrong.

2 (57m 42s):
But it was it your least favorite in the end?

1 (57m 44s):
Yeah. Easily. Right?

2 (57m 46s):
Just because you were worried about that high line of how you were. But

1 (57m 49s):
I Mean, just

2 (57m 50s):
Because you couldn't be loose. So not,

1 (57m 51s):
Not even loose. So it's like, and when I say least favorite, I, I'm using, You Know, like favorite the way you

2 (57m 57s):
Fun. No, it's your experience. You don't mean least favorite as in the show. You mean your experience.

1 (58m 1s):
But for me as Trevor, yeah. This was the most stressful, most high wire. Most because I, I don't want anyone
who's experiencing this disaster to feel like I'm minimizing it. 'cause I'm not, I literally have some of my
people in the audience Sure. Where we, we, we've experienced a collective loss. Yeah. So even on a
personal level, it's not like strangers. I'm like, I want you to think, You Know, but then, You Know, there's
someone who's watching going like, oh, really? What? I just tuned in for a funeral? Because it is a
celebration. Yeah. And I always think that's the paradox of life. One of the hardest paradoxes of life to, to
accept is that in the same hospital where somebody's dying, a baby's just been born literally just like a few
hallways away.

1 (58m 42s):
Someone is cheering, and then in another hallway people are crying because they've had the exact opposite
experience. But what Do you do? Do you say the hospital is all sad? Or Do you say no balloons? Or Do you
say no crying? Like, what, what Do you do? And that, that's, that's what it felt like coming in. And so even
doing the show, you saw, it's like, we were like, what jokes would work or wouldn't work? Or what do we say
or not say? Or this is when I knew the room was different. This is the first Grammys I've done where
everyone was sat before the show started. Hmm. That's when I knew this was gonna be a, a weird different
vibe. I didn't know which way the vibe would go. But I've never done a Grammy's other than Covid. But that
was different. I've never done a Grammy's where everyone is sat,

2 (59m 22s):
You mean? 'cause usually it's the mayhem that they're arriving as, and they're

1 (59m 25s):
Very juin. Yeah. Taylor's just walking Nice to see you. Yeah. And You Know that table and that table and, and
someone's over there. Do you think

2 (59m 32s):
Is the, we started it with, with you talking about devastation? No,

1 (59m 35s):
No, no. But they were seated. Yeah. Regardless of what I know what you mean. Yeah. But they were in their
seats. Yeah. They weren't, people were normally walking in. Yeah. You Know, the rappers are there. Oh,
Buster Rhymes is in the corner. Hey, what's going on Baby fa the, there's usually a party in everybody's
dressing room. Yes. There was none of that. There was none of that. But

2 (59m 53s):
There was by the end of the show. Yes,

1 (59m 55s):
Yes. But it wasn't a party. It was a, it was, it was the feeling that you have after a, a funeral or a wake. It was,
it was a feeling where most of the feelings that people had had, had been addressed. So it, You Know, when
you, when you're applying a, a bomb to a, a burn wound, there is a feeling of relief that comes with it that
allows you to not feel burnt for a moment. Like Kendrick and his acceptance speech was a, that was a love
letter to La Kendrick may have made the same acceptance speech. Were the fires not there? But I don't
think he would've, You Know, now he's like, he's talking about his love for each and every part of those. He,
every city. It wasn't just Compton, now it was him going, yo man Pasadena, and You Know, Santa Monica.

1 (1h 0m 40s):
And he's like, all of this is part of me. Every single artist who got up and said something about something
became part of the bomb that soothed the Knights and the show. So I think the feeling we experienced at the
end with Beyonce standing up there, I've never seen Beyonce that emotional. Mm. Never.

2 (1h 0m 59s):
Did you think that was because of what had happened in Los Angeles? Or Do you think

1 (1h 1m 3s):
That's I think it's, I think it's 'cause everything

2 (1h 1m 4s):
Winning an album.

1 (1h 1m 5s):
No, no, no, no, no. I think it's like

2 (1h 1m 7s):
People saw Billie Eilish crying when Beyonce was up on stage. Yeah. And lots of people have said to me,
why Do you think she was crying? And it's, it's really interesting. It's like, I think it could have just been the
emotion of the night, but I Mean, it could have been anything from being happy to see Beyonce. Some
people were saying, oh, she's sad that she's lost and that person, she's crying. I was like, oh my God. You
Know this girl. Yeah. You don't know Billy. She's the nicest person. Yeah. You don't

1 (1h 1m 26s):
Know Billy

2 (1h 1m 26s):
Then there is no, like, she is just the most exceptional human being. But I, I actually think, I, I think what set
her off, if I had to guess, yeah. And again, I don't know, I, I really don't know. I don know her that well, but I
think it was the fireman. I actually think the moment of those firemen coming out, because the fires were so
close to her and, and whatever, I think

1 (1h 1m 45s):
Oh, that's

2 (1h 1m 45s):
Interesting. Think the fireman made that moment emotional. And, and like, I wanted to do the Fireman for
album. I knew straightaway. I was like, we have to get firemen to give that album. Because that's, because

that is the biggest, that's the Celine Dion moment that we had last year. It's, You Know, it's special. It's who
you'd get if it wasn't the fires, you'd be asking Paul McCartney or

1 (1h 2m 1s):
Yeah.

2 (1h 2m 2s):
It's special. Yeah. And so the idea that you get 20 firefighters and you play some emotive music and you
come out, I actually think that was a real period or a full stop at the end of the show because it was like,
we've done all these bits. Let's support these local businesses. Let's have this like Gaga Bruno performance.
And then at the end you just see like this powerful 20 firemen giving out this historic moment that was to
Beyonce that made it even more historic. It's the thing that people have been begging for, for however many
years. And it's a group of firefighters. And I loved your line about this is the easiest job they'll ever have to
do. Yeah. Just give out an order. Said wonderful line. I loved it. And yeah. I just thought that might have led
to the emotion. It was like the person who they grew up loving in Beyonce, someone like Billy.

2 (1h 2m 43s):
Yeah. And you got the firefighters there and the night's gone. Like, it's, it's been a lovely night. Music's
brought people together. And I thought maybe that was why there was so much emotion in the room. But I
don't know. I think

3 (1h 2m 52s):
It was a combination of everything actually. Because

1 (1h 2m 54s):
You, you were seat, you were seated in the room. Yeah. So you, You were

2 (1h 2m 57s):
In that

1 (1h 2m 57s):
Table. Yeah. Yeah. So you seated there, you're not Yeah.

3 (1h 2m 59s):
Even before the show started. So If you go back and you listen to everything that leads up to Grammy
weekend, right. The pre parties, et cetera and so on. That adds the energy, the vibrancy of the city as the
energy. And not that the city wasn't vibrant, but things were very different from I'd say Wednesday onwards.
And that was evidence in the first writing meeting, we already agreed that the tone of the show had to be
different. Right. Yeah. Not to say that the show's gonna be sad, but we're observing a moment. Sure. And

then by the time you get to the actual show, everything that you're saying, it ends up being bigger than the
sum of its parts. So yes, Beyonce is emotional because it is a very big moment. But also you're correct.

3 (1h 3m 39s):
The people that do hand over the award tour Yeah. Do make it even that much more amplified. So I think it
was just, it was all of that coming together and it ended up being beautiful in a way. Because If you look at
the reviews now, when people speak about the show holistically, they're saying Best Grammys in however
many years, because that's really what TV is about. That rollercoaster of emotion is actually quite good
sometimes If you can cry this one moment, but also end up crying because you joyful and You happy that
Beyonce finally cleans the award. Yeah. That's what makes it beautiful. So it it ultimately worked out.

1 (1h 4m 14s):
Yeah. The emotion went. It was, it was really amazing. 'cause like the firefighters were backstage, man.
They were a great group. Like, just like, just, You Know. 'cause what I appreciated what you did there with
them was we do a good job of calling on people to help us when we need the help. We forget that they're
people as well. Mm. Do You Know what I Mean? So we call them firefighters, but they're people. Yeah. And it
was cool to meet the people who are firefighters backstage. Yeah. And just see them like laughing and
talking shit. So I was talking to, I was talking to one of the, one of the pilots who flies the helicopters, and he
like, runs the command of all of them. And he has to manage the airspace, You Know, like choreograph what
the planes are doing, what the helicopters are doing, so that they don't crash in.

1 (1h 4m 54s):
'cause you have to wait for the one to go by before the other one can come so that they can drop the water
and do the thing. You Know what I Mean? It, it's, it's complicated, but you need the water to be coming as
quickly as possible. You've got them picking up at the reservoir. So he's telling me this, we are talking about
it. We having, but then, and they epitomize the paradox of, of humanity, because on the one hand he's, he's
going, yeah, man, this thing was crazy. And he's like, man, but this was so great. Thank you for having us.
And I can't believe this. And he's like, and Beyonce took a selfie with, she took a selfie with every firefighter
backstage. By the way, did she, lemme tell you something. Like she even thanked them before she accepted
the award. You noticed that, right? Yeah. She, by the way, not just thanked them. Beyonce took the award
from both, like, there were two people she took the award from. One hugged both looked at both in the eye.

1 (1h 5m 36s):
And I know some people are like, man, what's the, what's the big deal with that? For me, those are like some
of the moments where I appreciate the humanity of someone more. Because when you've won album of the
Year, it is a lot easy. It's easy. Anyone who's won an award will know you. You, you black out. Yeah. Like, I
don't judge anybody. I remember when, when I won the Emmy, every thought I had before that you've
experienced this the first time especially, or the like, and it was Beyonce's first time you black out, you think
You Know everything before you come in there and they say your name, your mouth goes a little dry. You,

you go, wait, what? Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. And she had the, the humanity. I wouldn't even say the
presence of mine to go, I see you, I see you. Like, it felt very African to me.

1 (1h 6m 17s):
And then she, like, then she'd started with them. And then for me, what was great was seeing it carry on
backstage. Hmm. She like took selfies with the, and, and this is like, You Know, as an artist, you don't wanna
be taking a selfie when you've been crying a little bit and your makeup isn't great. The lighting is not, no.
Beyonce took all the selfies. That's great. The light was terrible backstage. These people were, and she was
talking to everybody and laughing. And within, within it's like crying, laughing. It, it felt like the full
encapsulation of what the night was about. Which is what LA feels like it's going through as a place. And
which is what, every place that goes through a disaster feels like. Right. You have the shock of the events
happening.

1 (1h 6m 56s):
You have the, the moment where everyone wonders like how bad it's gonna get or how far it'll go. And then
from that, in the most cliched way, you start noticing little sprouts of hope. And then you start seeing
resilience and you see the first smile and the first hug and the fir, You Know? And, and I think that for me,
even on a, on a personal level, was a beautiful encapsulation of all of it. And I think, I can't speak for her, but
I think that's what Beyonce was feeling as well. Remember man, she didn't get, she didn't get nominated at
the Country Music Awards. No. Imagine what it's what it feels like for Beyonce. Yeah. You dabble in this thing
called country. Now people think you're dabbling. People don't know how much she loves and grew up on
country.

1 (1h 7m 38s):
You Know what I Mean? She's proper Texas girl proper. You do this thing and then country music awards go,
nah, you didn't even do it to us. Nevermind. Like, winning, you didn't even do it. And you're like, damn. You
Know? And then here you are in, in another award show and you go, all right, well, I, I don't know. I don't
know what'll happen as an artist. You might've made a terrible mistake. Mm. And so I think it's a culmination
of everything. It's the room, it's the night, it's the people, it's the journey. It's her personal journey. It's, it's all
of it. And I think everyone else in the room felt that for her and for everything. Because we want to live in a
world where there's a happy ending.

1 (1h 8m 22s):
We all want that. That's not life, unfortunately. But we all want that. And in a way that felt like the happy
ending. It's the craziest sentence a human being can ever say. But it was like, it was amazing that the
underdog won. You Know? And it's, well to say like, Beyonce was the underdog, but that's what it felt like in
the room. Right. Whether it was Taylor Swift or Billie Eilish or, or Buzi or, You Know, Buster Rhymes or You
Know, Janelle Monet or you name it, people were like, damn, she did it. And I know people are like, yeah,
but it's Beyonce. It's like, no, no, no. But still in the same way, Superman, at the end of the movie, we go, ah,

he got out from oh, under that building that Zod smashed him with. That's what it felt like.

1 (1h 9m 2s):
It's like we, we've been on this journey and that was, yeah, it was, it, it was just like a magical, real moment
to be part of. Did

2 (1h 9m 9s):
The atmosphere in the room, 'cause obviously you are hosting it. I'm in a truck in the, in the parking lot
basically with all the cameras happen, you're disconnected in a weird way. Oh. But I'm sort of in the most
connected and also the most disconnected. Yeah. You Know, I'm across every element in some ways. But
then you're not, you're trying to just protect. But the feeling in the room, what was the feeling in the room
when Kendrick won? What was the feeling in the room when Beyonce won and did the, did the, did the room
change during the night? He, he, I, I think at the beginning everyone was like, how are we supposed to be?
But I do feel like at the end there was just a love in there and it was real warmth.

3 (1h 9m 42s):
A hundred percent it did. So in the beginning, as you correctly point out, people are kind of looking for
permission to act a certain way, but they don't know how to act until you give 'em that direction. Right. And
so, in the opening of the show, I think quickly people were there to celebrate artists and music. Obviously it's
music's biggest night, but you made them observe a moment initially and they're like, okay, cool, we with
that. And then slowly the show started to open up with the performances, obviously the production, et cetera
and so on. And people started to feel good about it. Now when you mentioned Kendrick, I can tell you right
now, everybody, when the Kendrick announcement, well, 'cause it happened twice. Yeah. In the live show,
not the three awards he won before.

3 (1h 10m 24s):
Both those instances, when Kendrick won, I think everybody in the building was happy for him. Everybody
was happy. Yeah. Yeah.

1 (1h 10m 31s):
They were

3 (1h 10m 32s):
To the point where they literally sang along to not like us until he stepped on stage. I'm a huge Drake fan. I
was incensed

7 (1h 10m 44s):
And you were, yeah. Yeah. Nine years,

2 (1h 10m 45s):
Years. Really?

7 (1h 10m 46s):
Cesar was, Cesar was like, what is this? Yeah. When the crowd

1 (1h 10m 50s):
Chanted in unison, Hey.

2 (1h 10m 53s):
I mean, wow.

1 (1h 10m 53s):
Yo,

3 (1h 10m 54s):
But I crazy. And

1 (1h 10m 55s):
You were personally hurt

3 (1h 10m 56s):
Also.

2 (1h 10m 56s):
You're seeing like the biggest icons in the world doing it. Yeah. Just seeing the crowd doing it. You're seeing,
I had all the cameras and you see Taylor and Beyonce and they're all singing along. It's so, lemme

1 (1h 11m 7s):
Tell you something, that, that moment was so big that the only texts I've gotten other than congratulations on
a Grammy's. The, the next number of texts that I've gotten from people without fail, the largest number is
this. I'll like, basically, I'll try and sum them all up in one sentence. One of my friends wrote in the best way.
He said, huh, this was a tough night for you. Light skins, huh? In fact, that's what this, that's what people all
sexist me. Are you okay? I was like, what Do you mean my eye? Okay? They're like, yo, yo, that hit Drake
so hard. I feel like it sort of spilled into you. Are you okay? I'm like, because it was such a And it was organic.
That was, yeah, because the, the room before that Mm.

1 (1h 11m 47s):
Sort of was observing the night that song elicited something in them where they forgot that they were observ,

they participated and they were just like, ah, sad, sad, sad. A minor. Yeah. I Mean, Do you think there was
jokes though? Do you think there was a turning point? Or Do you think it was No, no, no, no. It already
started talking

2 (1h 12m 4s):
Up. I

1 (1h 12m 4s):
Turning point it had started to warm up long before that. Well what, where would you say the Turning Points
us, I'm interested, I think

2 (1h 12m 9s):
The, the person who had the most difficult task all night Apart from you. Because obviously you had to bring
together, I think we gave Sabrina Carpenter a really hard

1 (1h 12m 17s):
Task. Yo, can I tell you? Yeah.

2 (1h 12m 18s):
And I tell, yes. I can say

1 (1h 12m 20s):
Can unpack it.

2 (1h 12m 21s):
So the thing I obsess about more than anything else, the thing I spend more time on than anything else is
the running order. What I Mean by that is like the order, everything from like where you go, what award, how
it, firstly it's a logistical nightmare 'cause you've gotta build one set while you're taking another one down and
you gotta time the other one so that this goes up while that goes down. It's like a crazy building process. But
Act one was Trevor set in the tone a band doors that had lost everything. And so therefore a band doors who
had lost everything and so therefore had almost like an ex, it was like a beautiful moment where we were like
seeing them and seeing them experience something opening the Grammys, which was really beautiful.

2 (1h 13m 1s):
Then you go in and we come to Trevor and you're doing your opening. Then Billie Eilish is on literally on a
background. Yeah. That got burnt down. Yeah. But it's where she comes from and it's a really beautiful song.
Then we've got the commercials, which is helping local businesses. And then you get to top of act two and
Sabrina Carpenter has to sing about espresso and she's doing it while she's doing a comedy act. It was a

1 (1h 13m 22s):
Full on comedy act.

2 (1h 13m 23s):
And that was the moment where it was like, okay, if we've done the work in part one, if all of those things,
Trevor's intro doors, mono, but fundraising, let's go big on the fundraising. Billie Eilish commercials. If those
five things have worked, then Sabrina's gonna be okay and this will be great. If not, then everyone's gonna
be like, why is she falling through the stairs? Do you not know what's going on in the world? Yeah, yeah,
yeah. Hashtag do better. All of that stuff. Yeah. Yeah. And luckily, I think, 'cause Part One went really well.
'cause you did really well. 'cause Bill Eilish was incredible. 'cause Doors was very moving and fundamentally,
Sabrina was unbelievably brilliant. Yeah. And funny and charming and like old school Hollywood Glam and
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Phenomenal like talent that suddenly everybody was up dancing at the beginning of the
song.

2 (1h 14m 7s):
They were not by the end of the song, they were, by the time they got to chapel, everybody was up. And
then from, from Benson, all the way from Benson to Doche, to Teddy, to Shazi, to Ray, it was carnage.
Everywhere we looked, people were on their feet. And I was like, and that was the biggest moment for me
when we finished Best New Artist. I was like celebrating with Hamish. 'cause I was like, actually whatever
happens from like the next hour and a half, two hours, like that was a really beautiful way of taking an
audience that you were nervous about. And by the end of Ray, they're on their feet like going, this is one of
the best things we've seen. And so yeah, that was, that was, that was the moment. But Sabrina had to turn

3 (1h 14m 43s):
It. So now on that, 'cause you've now reminded me of something that I observed and I didn't speak to you
about it even after a show, right. You've mentioned about the different set changes. Obviously you got stage
left and stage right. During Sabrina's performance, she had the part where she's by the porch. Yep. And at
the end, I think they're supposed to clear the porch so that you can drop the stage on the left. Correct. So

2 (1h 15m 4s):
Cardi,

3 (1h 15m 4s):
So Cardi would come out with the performance. And I think there was a delay with clearing that the stage
couldn't drop fully. He delivered the link and I think he had to buy like, it looked like 20 seconds. Correct. My
question is, and I've seen these things happen specifically with you, very, very stressful moments that the
viewer doesn't get to understand because they don't know what was meant to happen to begin with. And
things will go wrong in a major way. Yeah. I've never seen you, I've never heard you shout, I've never seen
you lose your composure. Is that a matter of just experience or is that how you are as a person?

2 (1h 15m 39s):
Well, that was Trevor's fault. That moment with Cardi. He doesn't know it. But that was Trevor's fault. I know
his, the way he speaks, I know his pace that he speaks. So when I do a link, I time it out and I read it as
Trevor's voice in my brain. And I time how long it's gonna take to do the porch. And for that to come down, I
want you to go back and I want you to watch that for some reason, and I have no idea why somebody
pressed times four on Trevor Noah and you whizzed through this link. It didn't matter in any way. You
whizzed through a link that you had never, ever whizzed through before. I don't even remember what the link
was. But you literally went, okay, the fundraising on the thing, but da da and here's somebody, da da da da
Cardi B.

2 (1h 16m 20s):
And I was like, oh my God, what happened? And I, I had forgotten to go, Hey, I'm gonna need you to read
this as your normal human being voice. You whiz through it. And suddenly I was like, oh no, the porch isn't
clear. So we just cut wide to seven. I I Do, You Know what, there's such big things in the show. I, I, I don't
lose my call at that. I'm also a bit like, what the audience going to be so surprised that the porch has to be
taken away and that like, I'm also a bit like it doesn't need, that is the least of our worries. The worry for me
was best new artist and how we logistically did that. 'cause that was impossible for Hamish and Hailey, our
directing team to do. But, but that moment was just like, well, one of those things didn't really bother me.

1 (1h 16m 55s):
I'll, I'll tell you why I went four times. Do

2 (1h 16m 58s):
You remember doing it then? Yeah.

1 (1h 16m 59s):
I'll tell you why, but I'll tell you after the break, don't go anywhere. 'cause we got more. What Now? After this?

2 (1h 17m 13s):
What was the link?

1 (1h 17m 15s):
So the link you're talking about was coming out of Sabrina, going into the monologue, going into the table
talk, moving around. So as CSWE says, no, it wasn't, wasn't there?

2 (1h 17m 29s):
No, you were right about the first part. You came outta Sabrina, came outta

1 (1h 17m 32s):
Sabrina

2 (1h 17m 32s):
And you, you went, you did a whole thing about jokes. Leave them to me. Yeah. But you did them under the
applause. So that was done and you weren't going into a monologue.

1 (1h 17m 40s):
Oh yeah, yeah. This was coming out of Sabrina perform coming out

2 (1h 17m 42s):
Sabrina performing into Cardi B, and

1 (1h 17m 44s):
Then going into the,

2 (1h 17m 45s):
Just into going into best rap album. It was a small link, but you went

1 (1h 17m 49s):
Through it. So can Okay. I can tell you, but I can tell you what the feeling was. So one of the biggest
unknowns coming into this show was where would the audience be? Right? How many people are in that
room?

2 (1h 18m 3s):
What Do you think? 14,000?

1 (1h 18m 5s):
Yeah, maybe 14. Yeah. With, I Mean,

2 (1h 18m 7s):
I Mean If you think, yeah, probably 14,000.

1 (1h 18m 9s):
Now, the weird thing about doing live TV and especially an award show or anything like that, is you are
balancing two balls that are very differently sized. You have the TV audience, which is massive, and then
you have the live audience, which is tiny In comparison, however, the live audience has a direct and
immediate impact on you. Yeah. The TV audience does not. Yeah. But now, If you ignore the live audience
that is at your peril as a performer, because they will never be with you. And If you don't have the room, you

don't have the right energy that gets you to where you need to be in whatever you're saying. They're not
listening, they're not paying attention, they're not coming with you. They're not laughing. You name it. If you
only pay attention to the room, the person at home is going, well, clearly this is not for me.

1 (1h 18m 54s):
Yeah. This is taking too long. And you've watched an award show with, it feels self-indulgent. You are sitting
at home and then the people there like, ah, nice shoes. Ha ha ha ha ha ha, ha ha. And you're like, all right,
clearly this is not about me, I'm just watching people. But this is the delicate dance. You are making a show
for television, but there aren't 200 people in that room with you. There are 14,000 people in the room with
you. Mm. So they are as important. Yeah. In a weird way as the people at home. And yet they, they serve
very different purposes. So your pace for the people in the room is different to your pace for the people at
home. Your pace for a joke is different. Your pace for everything. So in these moments, what I'm
experiencing is, I've just felt where the room is when we've come out of the top of the show and I've gone,
damn, we have a lot of work to do tonight.

1 (1h 19m 46s):
Because people aren't as celebratory as they normally are. So now when people are saying, how are you
and how have you been at every table, whether it's Cynthia Arrivo talking to Taylor Swift, whether it's John
Legend going over and talking to, You Know, Esperanza Sping or whoever it is, everyone there is going, how
are you? Normally it's like, Hey, what's up? How You feeling? Yeah, baby. Oh, look at you. No. Now people
are like, how are you? Doesn't matter. Why, how are you? And now I'm going, oh man, this is not where I
would do the jokes that I thought I would do. And I've gotta move that around.

1 (1h 20m 27s):
I'm doing all of this in my head. Yeah. Yeah. I'm trying to think of how we are shifting things. I'm trying to think
of, and I Mean, You Know me, well both of you do. After every show I go, there's a million things I could have
done better, You Know, but because I know comedy's so precarious, I'm always like, ah, it's the death of you.
You Know, to to to what you said at the beginning of the conversation. Like, look at what happened with Joe
Coy. I remember like everyone like laughing. Oh, Joe Coy is terrible. Then people said to me, they were like,
aha, Trevor Joe Coy, that was terrible. Right? I was like, I take no joy in that. There's, there's literally no part
of me that was like, haha. Yeah. Joe Coy. No, I was going as a fellow comedian, yo my man, I am not happy.
And I know what that's like as a feeling. You Know, any performer who's had it, especially a standup
comedian, I'll never look at them and be like, Hey, yeah, you idiot.

1 (1h 21m 9s):
No.

3 (1h 21m 10s):
And it also compounds because the more you lose the room Oh my. The worse your performance become.

And then even less compelling to even my friend,

1 (1h 21m 17s):
The viewer. Now my my friend, you, You Know it very well. So in this moment I'm going, we have to edit
what the show is or isn't going to be. Because I've responded to what's happened in like the monologue and
I've felt, 'cause I'm, You Know, me, I'm doing it dynamically for sure. I'm trying to feel where the people are
because contrary to popular belief, You Know, and I wish like people would understand this, especially
online, there is almost no comedian that is getting on stage to try and make you feel shit. The very act of
being a comedian is people who want to go on stage to make other people feel better. They like a laugh.
They like making people laugh. Right.

1 (1h 21m 57s):
But now, as, as like, the aperture has expanded and as like things are moved out of context, people are
subjected to comedy that they maybe didn't ask for or they're watching something that isn't for them. And I
understand that, You Know, that's the nature of, of entertainment and TV and social media in particular,
clipping of things, et cetera. Right. So I know as a performer, oh man, if I don't get that right or if that moves
or if I didn't get the, it's gonna create the wrong ripple effect for the show, not even for me. Mm. And I don't
want the show to have that kind of feeling. I don't want people coming up now if I'm having a terrible time,
Cardi B doesn't come on and, and like laughing giggle when she's presenting the award.

1 (1h 22m 37s):
Yeah. If I'm having a terrible time, Gloria Estefan doesn't come on. Like, thanks Trevor. And a little fun little
bounce in her vibe. If I'm having a terrible time, J-Lo and Heidi Klum don't pull off Benson Boone's outfit the
same way. Now they go like, Ugh, can we do this? Can we pull off this guy's? I don't know if I wanna be part
of Jim Gaffigan is not jumping in. Yeah. You Know, which for me was my favorite joke of the night. It's really
funny joke. Easily really funny joke. And shout out, shout out to Jim. Lemme tell you something, man. There
are a few things I love more than comedians who love jokes more than anything else. Because like, the
reason I say shout out to Jim Gaffin, he's one of my favorite human beings. He's one of my favorite
comedians by far. I didn't tell Jim Gaffigan that this was gonna happen. I didn't prep, I didn't prompt him, I
didn't preempt it, I didn't do anything.

1 (1h 23m 20s):
And I'm sorry, Jim, I really apologized, but I only thought about it the day of because the writers, right. So the
night before the Grammys

2 (1h 23m 29s):
Yeah. It only happened that day,

1 (1h 23m 30s):

Didn't it? Yeah. Night before the Grammys Luca gets traded to the Lakers. Yeah. Anthony Davis goes to the
Mavericks. Yeah. Massive news ces where messages me first thing in the morning. He's like, yo, big things
happened. I'm like, yep. I know Dan Meyer, one of the writers on the, on the team, he messages me, he's
like, we gotta make a joke about this. There's gotta be a trade joke or something. So I'm like, all right, we
gotta, we gotta do something. We'll figure it out. I get to the venue, I'm like, okay, I got it. I got it. I'm looking
at the seating chart and I go, Jim Gaffigan gets up coming back from an ad break. Now I'm like, I'm screwing
Ben. I hope I'm not. So I'm trying to find the least impactful place where this could happen. So I go, I loved it.
So I go, let's get Jim Gaffigan to standup and say welcome back.

1 (1h 24m 10s):
During the break, Trevor Noah was traded to Dallas. And so I'm now your host. I know. I'm as shocked as
you are. People love it in the room. We pitch it to you, you love, everyone's like, this is gonna be great. And
then like you, I made the Giant Producers mistake. I didn't ask Jim Gaffigan.

2 (1h 24m 28s):
Yeah. That was happening during the show. 'cause I said, is Gaffigan in, has anyone spoke to Gaffigan and
Kate Dowd who was with you? She went like, not that I'm aware of. Yeah. I was like, well, somebody might
need to go and tell Jim Gaffigan

1 (1h 24m 38s):
Spoken that we've written a joke for him. Nobody have spoken to Jim Gaffigan. And then I, this, this is a
mess. This is where like literally like you, I made a massive assumption. I go, Jim Gaffigan, if You Know
anything about his comedy, his writing, the way he creates shows and who he is, this man has an insatiable
appetite for jokes. Jim Gaffigan loves funny. So I made the mistake as a fan of his, not even as like a pier as
a fan of his, I went, there's no way Jim Gaffigan wouldn't love this. And I thought, I'm just gonna go up to him
right before he has to do it and tell him. I also know that Jim Gaffigan can host shows. Yeah. I also know that
he's fantastic. And he's calm under pressure. He's like, Jim Gaffigan is the stone cold killer in that way. You
Know what I Mean? So in my head, I made all these assumptions and then at the last minute someone said,
has anyone spoken to Jim Gaffigan?

1 (1h 25m 22s):
And I I went with you. I was like, with everyone. I was like, no. And then I said, I'll go. And I went and I found
Jim on the floor. This was like, maybe like a two acts sort of in, so I think it was after Sabrina Carpenter and
all of that. Yeah. And I went, Jim, there's a joke. Here's the joke. And I pitched it to him. Thank God he
immediately found it funny. And I was like, please, this is how You Know, I, I trust you, but this is how it
needs to be performed. And then the Red Hot Chili peppers are coming and I need you to not diminish their
moments. Oh yeah.

2 (1h 25m 49s):

Because that's the only thing I said to you. Yeah.

1 (1h 25m 50s):
Because I was like, we've promised them this is these guys, this is Ca Fornication. Yeah. These guys are
coming out for la their thing can't be goofy, please. And Jim, the consummate professional. Yeah. With the
best comedian out there doing his thing. Like he got up there and then honestly, like that moment for me as
well was such a, it was such a like wonderful team moment. Mm. I Mean, you heard the Room easily My
favorite joke of the night, like by far, by a lot of people. A lot of people were saying that as well. Yeah. Easily.
My favorite joke of the

2 (1h 26m 17s):
Night. Yeah. But that's why I don't think, I think the room was better than you think it was in so many ways. I
think. No, no, no,

1 (1h 26m 22s):
No.

2 (1h 26m 22s):
But no, by the time you got to act three it was, it was like they loved it.

1 (1h 26m 25s):
Yeah. I, so what I'm saying is this, like, I am also measuring it by how much I can contribute and what I can
do. Right. Not judging the rules. No, I

2 (1h 26m 33s):
Understand.

1 (1h 26m 33s):
But I know that as Trevor, there's certain things I should be, You Know, certain marks I should be hitting or
certain, certain connections that I should be making. But You Know, you, You Know this like, making a live
show is like flying a plane and then discovering something's wrong with it while it's flying. Yeah. And you
have to fix it.

2 (1h 26m 51s):
Yeah. A hundred percent.

1 (1h 26m 52s):
Oh, the Wing is loose, but we can't land. It's live. Ah, a normal TV show. You go cut, cut, cut, cut. Tell. All
right. Everybody, hey, let's land the plane. Let's fix the Wing. Live show doesn't do that. Live show goes, we

are flying and there's a massive error. Can somebody go down and check on the landing gear while we're
flying someone go check the Wing while we're flying. Hey, check the the windscreen. Check the apparatus,
check the equipment, check the, while we are flying. So I even as Trevor as a comedian, there's moments
where the show's happening and I'm going, ah, I would've done that differently. I could have done that
differently. The person I was looking at wasn't there. So then I have to change this. I'm gonna move that. I'm
gonna, but it's live. Yeah. I don't wanna mess up your timing. It's not about me. So if I miss with a joke or
anything Yeah.

1 (1h 27m 33s):
The show keeps moving. Yeah. I can't be like, wait, wait, hold on audience, let me give you 10 minutes that I
know is gonna

2 (1h 27m 38s):
No, but what you are good at, and this is where I actually messed up, I think in, in, in the bit with Cardi,
which is what the started of this discussion was that I just wasn't on my timings. And I, and I'm always in his
ear, the whole show. And I'll be like, I need you. I need That's true. I need you to, to like go a bit longer here.
Beyonce's not in her seat for Country album. Yeah. The weekend set isn't set. You Know, all of those things.
And you are unbelievable at like, there was one bit where you stood next to Bill Eilish and I said, mate, I
really need a favor. I'm so sorry. I, I like, I know this is a quick link, but I need you to fill for like a minute. And
you stand there and it's the most natural thing. I watched the show last night. I, I sat in my house. Harvey
came over and we watched it. We got a curry and we watched it together. 'cause I can actually enjoy it. And
you are brilliant. You stand there, go hey.

2 (1h 28m 18s):
You're like, Hey Billy, how you doing? And she's like, oh. And you do a whole thing. Yeah. No, but you see
something, you a whole

1 (1h 28m 24s):
Yeah. But no, I could say something, but,

2 (1h 28m 26s):
But it was because I needed the time and meanwhile everyone's building the set or whatever and you are
just, you found it and no one would ever know the timing your way are going take a bit longer. Yes.

1 (1h 28m 34s):
But this is also where people sort of, I wish they could be in my brain for some of these moments. This is like
one of the moments I'm talking about. We are coming back from an ad break, right? Right. Before we come
back, you say, Trevor, we need extra time. I go, okay, that's fine. We need extra time. I'm here. You're like,
yeah, speak to anyone or whatever. So I'm right there. I look down and I go, who's around me? I'm like, oh,

Billy Eilish is here and finishes here. But now literally we're coming back and 3, 2, 1, just before we go, like,
action. Essentially to me, Billy looks at me with terror in her eyes and she goes, uhoh, but she doesn't go
uhoh like a funny uhoh. She goes like, like, she goes, uhoh, like, please don't do this to me.

1 (1h 29m 15s):
Now, I wasn't gonna do anything to her, but now I'm like, oh man, I, I don't even want it to seem like I was
doing something to her. Because here's the thing that people also don't get right. I know it's easy to put
people up on pedestals and like they're artists and they've won awards and the yo i, I know it's hard to
imagine this, but there are human beings under all of these veneers. There are human beings under these
Twitter handles. There are human beings under the dress rehearsal. There's human beings under the like
top, you name a top album. There's a human being under it. And then my job for me as Trevor, is I'm not
coming in there to make your night less fun or less enjoyable because you are also on the edge of your seat
wondering if you're gonna win a Grammy.

1 (1h 29m 57s):
You are wondering if your work is gonna be lauded. You are wondering if you're gonna be rewarded by your
peers by the thing that you've spent so much time doing. Nobody wants to lose. Nobody wants to be a loser.
No one wants to people to like laugh at them. I don't care who you are. Nobody wants that feeling. So for
me, as the host, I'm looking down at this person who's now just gone like, man, and I've been with Billy ish,
like at all the Grammys. This is the first time she's ever done that. Billy's never looked at me and gone, uhoh,
she's her And Finnis look at me like, what's up? Hey, hey, this is the first time she went Uhoh. Like, and I was
like, ah. But now we're live now. Now what are we doing that so then, and you still need to fill for another
point and you what it was, but I needed it.

1 (1h 30m 37s):
And so now I say, that's why I said the honest thing, which was like, Billy, I don't know why you're saying I'm
not gonna, and she'd like, she, she's looking at me like, I don't trust you. This is coming. And so that moment
is honest. And, and, and I think that's sometimes the thing that people miss in a lot of these moments. You
Know, like when was it like right after the Grammys, For instance? It was, I think it was you. No, maybe, or
someone contacted me. They're like, Hey man, how Do you feel? Some people are like feeling bad about
like some of the jokes or whatever on the show. And I was like, I get it. But I like the, the one thing that I wish
people would get with comedy comedians, I don't speak for everyone, but I think I speak for most
comedians. We're trying to make people laugh. We're trying to have a good time. Alright?

1 (1h 31m 18s):
The hardest place to experience a collective safe comedy show is where everyone isn't the same. And the
Grammys, For instance, is the best place for strangers and people who don't normally come together to
come together. But it's also one of the most precarious places for comedy because the number one thing
that comedy needs is context. Do You Know what I Mean? So like, I saw someone who said, you arrogant

American, how can you say this shit about my people? Then I was like, I'm, I'm not American. Someone was
like, how could you make that joke about immigrants? How dare you? You Know, you American. What? Then
I was like, oh, I thought you knew that I was an, I was an immigrant.

1 (1h 31m 59s):
Do you get No. But those are small things that you can take for granted as a performer. You go, oh yeah,
because you've tuned into the show for an artist that maybe you never tune in for. You don't, you don't know
me and you don't, you, you have this assumption. The show's in America, this person's talking about la
Yeah, that's an American. I'm like, no, no, I, I'm, I'm an, I'm an immigrant. I'm making a joke about the idea of
immigrants by some people. And, and, and those are the moments where you go like, ah, damn, I'm always,

2 (1h 32m 23s):
But does it bother you that people like, does it get to you because the majority of stuff is positive, but yet
you're, you'll think about the

1 (1h 32m 29s):
Negative. So, no. So I, I don't think of it. It's a weird one to say. I don't think of it personally. 'cause I don't
think it's personal. There's two things that I do whenever I look at any type of outrage or any type of type of
criticism. Actually three things. Number one, I always acknowledge that the size and scope of it are a lot
smaller than, than we think. You Know, and you often say this, these way in general, how many people are
saying a thing is oftentimes nowhere near to, You Know, the amount of people saying it. It's just the few
people can be loud. That's the first thing I think of. The second one is, it affects me on a professional level
because then I go, I always take it on me.

1 (1h 33m 11s):
I go, I didn't do that properly. You Know, one of my favorite things I heard was, I don't think it, he's credited
with it, but I loved Anthony Selek was on a, on a podcast and was talking about comedy and the idea, and
he said something that I, that I loved and is true. He said, art is getting away with it, You Know? And so I
don't care who you are as a comedian, You Know, whether you are Dave Chappelle or Chris Rock, or Trevor
Noah, Anthony Jeselnik or Jim Gaffigan or Kitty Flanagan or you name it. Getting away with it is what makes
it, it means that the people have fully understood the context that you were delivering a joke with, and you
manage to bring them into your world to say it. That's why a comedian can make a joke about, You Know,
the most heinous things.

1 (1h 33m 54s):
You Know, we talk about this all the time in England with like Jimmy Carr, Jimmy's saying the most horrible
things, You Know, I would, You Know, killing his family jokes or jokes about like mass murder, whatever it is.
But because the audience knows he's Jimmy and they know that this is a joke, there's a full context. As soon
as the context gets removed, people react or respond differently. You Know what I Mean? Hmm. And so on a

professional level, I just always, it's a good reminder to me always to go like, alright, you can, you can work a
little bit better. How Do you craft that perfect joke? Like Chappelle, when he was on SNL for me, that was
one of his best performances I've ever seen. And I told him, I was like, yo, the way you think of the line when
he says, people were laughing at people, celebrities losing their houses, people were like, yeah, burn your
house.

1 (1h 34m 37s):
Burn your house. And then he goes, and that's why I hate poor people. Yeah. If you miss with that joke, the
headline is, Dave Chappelle says he hates poor people. But that man delivered it with such precision and
perfection in the moment, in the tone, in the, everything that everyone knew, it was a joke and they knew
that it was a misdirect and what he was, it worked. You don't even have to get technical. It worked. Right.
And so as a comedian, when I miss, I don't go screw the audience. I go, ah, a little, little bit. You Know, you
could try fines, try. Yeah. Try, try something different there. Move that around. Where's the audience? How
Do you meet them? What are they thinking? What are they not thinking?

1 (1h 35m 17s):
Because my intention is never to go out there. And I, that's not what I'm doing. So it doesn't affect me. The
third thing I do is try and contextualize it all. And I think that's one of the great things that I've enjoyed about
working on the Grammys. We live in a world where people are spending less and less time with people who
are not like them. We live in silos. People don't mix with people from other religions. People don't have
conversations with someone who has a different political point of view. People aren't sitting down at tables
with somebody who listens to different music. It's not happening as much as it used to. Right. You Know, we
talked in one of the previous episodes with M-K-B-H-D, mark s Brownley, we talked about like this idea of
the, the audience of one, how the for you page on social media is a fantastic invention, but it's also taken
something away from society that we never knew we needed, which was to have a collective page.

1 (1h 36m 13s):
Did you see the thing? You saw the thing I saw the thing. There's fewer and few instances of that. It's the
Super Bowl, it's the World Cup, it's the Grammys, You Know what I mean? Your for you page, my for you
page can be completely different. So what we think reality is, is completely different. None, none of us is
wrong, but it's different. And so what I do is I contextualize it. And the reason I say the Grammys has helped
me do that is because I have been at five Grammys now, and I've watched how people have been offended,
by the way, not by me. I've been lucky. Like people have been great, like, for most of it. But like, I've seen
people get offended at Sam Smith's performance that one year people like get offended. Yeah.

1 (1h 36m 53s):
How could he, how what, what how, how I've seen people get offended by, You Know, like, oh, Shakira,
really? There are children watching and you're gonna dance. And it's like, it's like, no, no, no. The con
because they didn't, if You Know Shakira, You Know, this is Shakira, this is great. I've seen people get

offended by a rap act that's come on and someone hears like one or two of the lyrics and they're like, how
can they say you're gonna put that person on a public television show? And let them say that. How, how
could they say that sentence? I've seen people get offended by how some of the are dressed during a show.
You Know, this is family viewing. How could I've seen some people get offended just because an artist
performs after another artist. I've seen the downside of humans coming together who are not homogenous is
there's likely to be more offense.

1 (1h 37m 41s):
The upside is, that's when you get the most beautiful tapestry. And I think that's what we experienced on the
nights. I saw people stand and cheer for Doci because they had discovered her with that performance. Doce
knew Doce. Mm. But people were standing up like, man, I just discovered Doce. Mm. People were standing
and cheering for artists. 'cause they, they're like, I never, I never chapel row. They're like, is this what a
chapel row is? Yeah.

2 (1h 38m 11s):
Charlie

1 (1h 38m 11s):
X, CX. I saw old people start like going like, I don't know what this is. Yo, the weekend, that whole laser show
the whole, and I, and I think that thing for me, I might be in the minority, but I think the risk of people being
offended for me is worth bearing if it means we are all at least in the same space to be offended. Because I
think society needs more of that. And so, honestly, on a personal level, I always just put my head down and I
go do better Trevor. And I don't mean do better, like change the subject. I go like, no. How can you then in, in
future create something where the context isn't lost? If I make a joke and the point of the joke is what it is,
and then you get angry, I really don't care.

1 (1h 38m 54s):
But If you go, oh, you, you said this and it, it meant that. And I'm like, no, no, no, that's not what I meant.
Then I go, okay, then

2 (1h 39m 0s):
I needed to do better by,

1 (1h 39m 1s):
Yeah. I go as a comedian, explain that concept. Damn man. I go as a comedian. I'm like, okay. Yeah. And I,
and I look at a joke and I go tell it 10 other different ways. How could you tell it in 10 different ways so that
the person who's listening to it would feel different about it? It's

2 (1h 39m 14s):

D it's a different world that we live in now. This is going off from the Grammys, really, but like for you, when
you do this podcast, right? And you are out there and you're doing daily show and you used to do it right?
You're doing comedy, you're doing things. You, you are now talking to an audience that often will be offended
for no reason, but sometimes might be offended for a reason. Do you have to change in the last few years?
Do you think you've had to change the way you are because of the way people react to stuff? Now? Do you,
Do you over sense yourself? Are you more cautious in the way you speak? Are you worried about that?
Does that, or Do you still have just the freedom to say whatever you think is right and funny?

1 (1h 39m 49s):
I actually think I've gone the opposite way. Wow. And I'll tell you why. When I was hosting the Daily Show, I
wasn't just hosting The Daily Show. I was executive producing The Daily Show. I was in effect the employer
of 170 odd people. I think at the peak, 190 people, me and my other executive producer, this is our job is to
not just make a good show, but keep these people employed. Like that's the pressure that comes with
hosting a show is that If you get kicked off the air, it's not just me, it's my camera guys, it's my team, it's my
this, it's my, and so in my head I'm going, us fails, not me fails, us fails, right? So if I say something that hurts
this collective, can I stand by that?

1 (1h 40m 34s):
Oh, Trevor, you made this joke and now the Daily Show doesn't exist anymore. And I'm like, yeah, I don't
care. Yeah. But I do care. 'cause I, You know, I, I know Benny's kid. I I I do care. Do You Know what I Mean?
I, I hang out with Zach. I do, I do care. Hmm. So that's the bigger thing for me now. I'm a lot more nimble.
And secondly, I also believe, You Know, and Erin, who, who, who who does my hair for not just for the, but
for the Grammys and a bunch of things here in la, she said it beautifully the other day. She said, I feel like
we're moving into the age of authenticity and I believe that. And so I go, You Know, we talked to, to Marquez
about it.

1 (1h 41m 15s):
On the show, we talk about everything. Yo man, I, I no longer live in a space where I think things should be
about like the publicity or the PR of it. If someone says to me, I didn't like that joke. I go, tell me why. And
they tell me and I go, oh yeah, that's, that's not what I meant. But thanks for the notes and I'm gonna try and
tweak something or move it. I won't not say things. What I am more cognizant of though is that we have lost
so much context. So even when I'm in South Africa doing a podcast with cwe and Anele, or even If I'm telling
a joke in Abu Dhabi or if I'm doing like a TV show in Sydney, Australia, I know that that joke doesn't end in
Australia anymore.

1 (1h 41m 54s):
Right? I know that that podcast doesn't end in South Africa anymore. I know that the Grammys doesn't end
in LA anymore. And so now what I'm trying to do, which is very hard, I'm not even saying it like in a woe is
me, where actually I actually like hard things. I like challenges. I go, wow, how Do you tell a joke that

maintains its context across borders? It's almost impossible. But I love the opportunity and the challenge and
so now I actually say more, but I spend more time trying to get to the context. Does that make sense?

3 (1h 42m 27s):
Yeah. So now Ben, to you, right? I guess in the same vein, when you used to do the Late Late show, which
obviously used Do, you are also EP of, there was in some ways an extension of the work you do at the
Grammys. So For example, the week leading up to Grammy, sometimes you'd have a guest on that would
throw forwards to Grammys. And if anything were to happen because it's only one night's, the Grammys, if
anything were to happen on the Sunday evening, you would've had an opportunity maybe on the Monday
evening to interview whomever the person was, clarify whatever needs to clarified, et cetera and so on
without the late late show. Now, Do you find that you don't get to do a do over? Does, is that something that
actually filters into your mind at all?

3 (1h 43m 9s):
Because I used to obviously see the synergy between the two shows, right? Just having, You Know, been
around in proximity to you guys. I'd see how the one would work with the other.

1 (1h 43m 20s):
Yeah, I,

2 (1h 43m 20s):
I think I miss with the late, it's not specifically missing replying to something that's happened. 'cause I don't, I
don't think, I don't think the stuff I would ever go in is ever goes into that contra controversial, the Grammys, I
can think of two moments probably in the five Grammys I've done, including last nights or whenever it was
two nights ago. That was, I got a bit of stick for Wap with Cardi and Meghan,

1 (1h 43m 46s):
The Stallion. Oh yeah, I remember, I remember that.

2 (1h 43m 47s):
My answer on that one was Cardi B and Meghan Thee Stallion wanted to do that performance. They were
excited about it. And who am I to say no, actually, who am I to censor that and say, no, you shouldn't do that.
You need to be more like this. That's just not ever the job of someone like me. And then the Sam Smith one
also, you're right, it did people, people got, I got texts from a couple of people who were like, it was
inappropriate more from the religious perspective. 'cause he was stressed like a devil. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It
was. And people were, there was a couple of people who said, You Know, I, I don't think I'll be able to watch
the Grammys anymore because of that. And I loved that performance and I thought it was amazing. But like,
I, I have to say I've, I've probably changed a little bit. I've got two little girls now. I had them then, but maybe
they were of an age where they were repeating stuff and they were, You Know, sitting in the front row at the

dress rehearsal watching Charlie XCX.

2 (1h 44m 32s):
And I was a bit like, oh God, my five year old's like grinding, like throwing panties in the air. And I'm like, oh
no, what have I done? But I'm probably a bit more conscious of it. I was a bit more like gung-ho maybe five
years ago. And now I am a bit more, more conscious that, You Know, you are making a show that you want
America to feel comfortable watching, not just your America. And so I'm very aware of that and I think that
that, that comes into me as for like the late late show. I don't miss being able to respond. 'cause it's James'
show, not mine. Yes, I was the showrunner with Rob, but it was James' show. What I miss is something will
happen in the world and you have no outlet to make a joke about it or make a sketch about it. Or there'll be
something that happens in pop culture and you'll be like, oh, this is a great idea for like a spoof music video.

2 (1h 45m 12s):
I miss that hugely, but not in response to work that I'm doing. Really. That's, that's not what I miss. But I, but,
but I definitely miss that power of creating an hour of television every day. 'cause it was just the most
remarkable thing I think about the Grammys and it's like months of work for like that four hours, whereas at
least the late late show you turn up every morning, you have a blank page. Yep. And you can do whatever
you want. And that next day you can't celebrate the good ones or mourn the bad ones 'cause you've got
another one tomorrow. You Know? Whereas if something goes wrong at the Grammys, and luckily it didn't.
And in fact I was happier than I've ever been after this Grammys. Weirdly, I felt the most like weight off my
shoulders at the end. I dunno If you felt that from me afterwards.

2 (1h 45m 53s):
No, I did.

1 (1h 45m 53s):
I did. Well, you, because we had the, we had like no technical issues. We

2 (1h 45m 56s):
Had no technical issues and it gone well. And I really felt like everything that we wanted, we'd, but, You
Know, you had done that high wire act brilliantly and the performances have worked. So it wasn't my favorite
Grammy's that we've done, even though everyone's saying, oh, best Grammy's

1 (1h 46m 9s):
Ever. I was actually about

2 (1h 46m 10s):
To ask you, it wasn't my favorite Grammy's ever, but it was the biggest relief I've had because I was just like,
oh man, thank God it's over the weekend. Didn't get leaked. Like that was a secret carried for a long time.

Huge. That was huge. And best new artist is something I've wanted to do for so long. And yeah, I just
thought it all worked really well. And I thought the other thing is, You Know, that thing that you carry around
and the voting has nothing to do with me. I don't even have a vote, of course I don't. But everyone going,
You Know, Beyonce's gotta win out the air. Oh, it's just a relief that it

1 (1h 46m 40s):
Happened. But also talking about like offense, I personally have gotten texts that have been delivered to me
through like, I don't even know how, like people know a person know literally people being like, how dare you
say Beyonce made a country album? Do you, let me tell you something that don't you dare, but, but like
people fi like people fighting with me by the way. Like I made a category. Like I vote. Yeah. Like I chose, I'm
even going like, okay, first of all, I don't know how you got this to me, but I also cannot do anything for you,
me, myself as Trevor. I cannot do anything for you. Right. Same. But, but, but that's what I Mean by like
offense in that way. And, and here's the thing, here's the thing that's, that's, that's tough in life.

1 (1h 47m 22s):
What's tough in life is we should always remember that the car crash gets the most attention. Yeah. Right?
And it's, it's the way humans are designed. You Know, sometimes we try and make it insidious. Oh, the news
companies, they, they'll always cut to the thing. Yeah. But also as humans, we look at the car crash. How
was your drive, man? There was a massive accident. How was your drive? I don't even know. You don't
report the fact that the highway moved freely. You report the fact that there was a giant pile up. Okay. So I
also understand this and I try to remind myself of it and think of it for people, but like, what I appreciate, I I
will say of the Grammys, so when I have the phrase like, it's not my favorite Grammys, I'm only talking on
like a technical level.

1 (1h 48m 3s):
Sure. And on a like ease of, You Know, it's like I was, If I was a pilot, I was going, it's not my favorite fight
because of the storm and the turbulence and all of that. Yeah. However, and I Mean this honestly, getting to
the end of that show, seeing the types of hugs that people were giving each other, seeing the way that
people were responding to what had happened, seeing Doce, like celebrating her performance backstage.
Like, You Know, like the greatest moment ever when she's like, we did that shit. You Know what I Mean?
Seeing like everyone, every single person experience something so special. You Know, where there's like
Bruno, like Bruno Mars, people don't know how much that guy loves music and, and doing it well. So to, You
Know, to see, to see that in every way.

1 (1h 48m 45s):
And then on top of that ended with like, firefighters coming up to us, even when people like, thank you. And I
was like, you can't thank me. Firefighters coming up and me, man, thank you so much. And, and I'll be
honest, that's what keeps me going. Yeah. And I always say there's this phrase IIII, it came into my head a
few years ago and it was let everything you experience in life be a question, be an answer to a question you

already have. That's what I said to myself. Let everything that happens to you in life, be an answer to a
question you already have. And I was like, you don't know what the question may be, but when something
happens to you, let it be an answer. So your car is taking long, you've given the car to a valet or something,
it's not coming.

1 (1h 49m 29s):
And you're standing there and you maybe the answer to your question, am I a patient person is being
answered right now. Do You Know what I'm saying? It's an answer to that question. Someone says to you,
Hey, your shirt looks nice. And you go, oh, thank you. And you feel something. That's an answer to the
question, do I care how people think I'm dressed? Take it the way you want to. But it's an answer to a
question you didn't know you had. And for me personally, when like a firefighter comes up to me and goes,
You Know, like one of the, like the, I think it was one of the chiefs, she was standing on stage, Sheila Yeah.
Doing, yeah, Sheila doing the actual award. She, Sheila came to me and she went, you. And I was like, oh
God. And she went, she's like, I've got a bone to pick with you kid.

1 (1h 50m 10s):
And I was like, what? She's like, you gave me so many amazing years at the Daily Show, and then you go
off and live life. She is funny though. And she really is. Yeah. She's like, and you just leave me like this.
She's like, I'm glad you're doing everything else you're doing, but oh. And she's like, gimme a hug. And it's
like that moment and then like, what

2 (1h 50m 30s):
Was the question that she answered in that moment though?

1 (1h 50m 32s):
The, the question that she answered for me was, am I doing it for anybody? Right. Does it mean anything to
anybody else? You Know, is is it like, because I, I'll be, I'll be frank with you and Cesar, You Know, that like,
You Know, this intrinsically about me. I don't care for most things and I don't do it for me genuinely. I have a
great time like doing most things, just like whatever. But when it's outward facing, I don't care for most stuff.
But in those moments I remind myself that it's not always about me. And I see her joy and I'm like, oh yeah
man, I'm trying to remember those people. You Know, like the other firefighter comes up to me and he's, he's
just talking about like the stuff I've said and the way he, I've made him laugh and, and I go like, oh yeah,
don't forget those people.

1 (1h 51m 16s):
And and for me, the Grammy's in that way, I know it's not the reason reason, but to your point, when you go,
damn, the Grammys itself sitting near like $10 million that has been raised just on one night from, You Know,
literally from the top, from doors coming all the way through Billie Eilish, Sabrina Carpenter, and then you
name it, all the way down to that final performance with Charlie xxx. And you go like every single person had

to come together to do this. And in the same way every single person who donates had to come together.
Like I'm, I didn't know this, but now I'm even more proud knowing that each contribution wasn't $10,000.

1 (1h 51m 56s):
So much prouder. Yeah, I agree. Everyone was just like, yo man. And I, that's why I kept saying it the whole
night, just give what you can. It's not about like, this is not about like just give what you can. And I think that
was the lesson for me of doing the whole Grammys for this year was everyone just give what you can in
every situation. $5 doesn't help anybody who's lost their house. It doesn't, but if everybody can give $5, you'll
be shocked at what can happen. Do You Know what I Mean? Trevor Noah can't, that's literally what
happened. Yeah. Trevor Noah can't make the Grammys. I can't, I can't make it good and I can't make it bad,
but I can contribute to it. You Know, everyone can, and even like the recording members voting, You Know,
no one can make Beyonce happy.

1 (1h 52m 38s):
You can't. But 13,000 people came together from the music industry and made her happier I argue than I've
ever seen her. 'cause I don't know her personally in that way, but like, I don't know. And I think that was, that
was the overarching feeling for me. And

3 (1h 52m 52s):
Isn't that kind of, I suppose the nub and the joy of doing a show like the Grammys, that it's actually so
consequential in so many people's lives. If you do one of your evening shows, one of your evening shows,
yeah. You can make a person feel good, but you do the show on behalf of the academy. It literally means so
much to all of those artists that are in attendance at night.

1 (1h 53m 13s):
Yeah. And I also wanna stress this to people. You don't understand how many artists are in that room. I know
we, we see the big artists. Yeah. And You Know them. But man, you walk down and you'll see like a
composer who is having the night of their lives sitting with their spouse. All they've done is compose or even
like conduct classical music and they're just like, this is the pinnacle of what I've worked for. Sorry, I cut you
off. Carry on.

3 (1h 53m 40s):
And so while you're not in charge of like who wins and who loses, you certainly are in charge For example,
of who gets the performance in what

2 (1h 53m 48s):
Way. Yeah, that's right.

3 (1h 53m 49s):

Right. And you've also got a very personal relationship with the artists. I've seen it. I've experienced it. Does
it ever get to a of them?

2 (1h 53m 56s):
Not all of them. That's some of

3 (1h 53m 57s):
Them. That's exactly it. Does it ever get to a point where it airs to attention or I suppose then will make your
relationship even better? Yeah. Because of it does get attention decision you've taken.

2 (1h 54m 7s):
Yeah, a hundred percent. There'll be artists who I've got relationships with and they'll be like, I've got a new
single, I've got, I'm gonna save it for the Grammys. And I'm like, Ooh, I don dunno if I've got a spot. And I'm
like, this is awkward. Yeah. There's like really lovely things. I'd say like the three, the three performances that
I was really excited about for a long time, not a long time, actually, some of 'em were a long time when I,
when it was actually I called, I called Brandy Carlisle, who's a really good mate of mine. And I said to her, I
really, I'd been listening to, I love LA in my car going between The Hotel downtown where we were
evacuated to and my house where I was sitting during the day because I never thought the fires were gonna
come and take my house away. But I did think like an ember could fly over and like Yeah.

2 (1h 54m 49s):
Yeah. And then, and then a small little fire becomes a big one. Right. So I just decided the kids would be
downtown in The Hotel, which is where we'd sleep. And then I in the day would come and sit in my garden
and I had a hose at the front, a hose at the back of a hose

3 (1h 54m 59s):
In the massage.

1 (1h 54m 59s):
What's the plane when the em over? Yeah.

2 (1h 55m 1s):
I have three hoses. Right. So I would sit there all day on my laptop doing work by the window in the garden.
And I'd just like look in case it was embers because I can put out an em,

1 (1h 55m 12s):
You Know, You Know you like the guy in a zombie apocalypse Yeah. With like this tiny little rifle. Yeah. And
you are just like, I'm I'm gonna protect my family.

2 (1h 55m 20s):
I'm gonna protect my house.

1 (1h 55m 21s):
Yeah.

2 (1h 55m 22s):
But no, but, but it's true because the truth of it is my house was only gonna burn down because we were f
we were at the edge of Brentwood. So the fire was a long it, it was mile and a half. Yeah. But it was, it was
close but it wasn't close enough. If it was coming for us like it did with Palisades or, or or or Alt t know, I
would've been able to get in my car and go Yeah. But it was more likely that something, we've got a lot of
trees over the house. Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So I was just like, I think it would be better for me just to
be there, put out a little fire. Yeah. Then it become a big fire and then it's too late. So that's what we decided
to it. It's not, I promise you it's not as risky as it sounds. But I was listening to, I love LA and I, again, going
back to our earlier point that I've suddenly become obsessed with this city.

2 (1h 56m 2s):
I don dunno what's happened to me. But, so I'd be listening to it and I'd be like, what a great way that is
making me feel good. I love that song. Maybe if Randy Newman would allow us to change some of the
lyrics, which he did. But then I was like, who performs it? And at one point I was like, Stevie Nicks would be
great. And then I was like, Miley Cyrus would be quite fun. Would that be cool? And then I thought, well Red
Hot Chili Peppers would be great, but they'd never do. I love La 'cause they'd wanna do their own song,
which might, which is amazing. But then it would be a bit more somber. Yeah,

1 (1h 56m 29s):
Yeah. It's a very somber.

2 (1h 56m 29s):
So I called Brandy Carlisle and I went, ah, I, I really like this song. She think it's a good idea. Who Do you
think I should, Do you think Pink? Do you think? Like, who Do you think? And she said, have you heard of
the Band Doors? And I was like, it's funny. I actually just watched them on Kimmel two nights ago. 'cause I
know that they're, I didn't know them well, but I knew of them and their house, like one of their houses
burned down, parents' house, all of that. And she was like, I know them. And they're like incredible
musicians. And so I was like, maybe we do that. And we put a super group around them. So that was an
amazing moment doing a Zoom with that band. And they were like, why is the Grammys calling us? Like
they're not that they're not amazing, but like they're not nominated band. Yeah. And I was like, I'd like to
speak to you. And I got on a Zoom with Taylor and Griffin and their manager Brian.

2 (1h 57m 12s):

And I said, look, we'd, I want you to open the Grammys, come following the footsteps of Prince and Bruce
Springsteen and Michael Jackson. And, and they were kind of like, oh my God, this is insane. And it's a
weird moment for them because they know they've just experienced the biggest sadness in their life. They've
lost everything.

1 (1h 57m 29s):
But then out of that comes back. But out of

2 (1h 57m 31s):
That they're opening the Grammys. So it's like a really amazing thing that they were dreamt of as kids. And
then it's a real weird feeling for them because you're like, well I'm only getting that. Yeah,

1 (1h 57m 40s):
Yeah. I'm not gonna

2 (1h 57m 40s):
Then let's be honest, doors aren't gonna open the Grammys at this stage. They might in a few years, but
right now they're not opening the Grammys unless that happens. So that's actually a bit of a head screwing
thing for them. But that was beautiful 'cause I knew it could be amazing. And I knew they were great
musicians and every musician we called John Legend, Brittany Howard except Shel Crow, I, we emailed
Bob Dylan's manager. And I haven't heard back yet, but I'm hoping maybe we'll get a reply.

1 (1h 58m 2s):
Maybe he's in South Africa. You never know. You could be in South Africa taking time away. So those

2 (1h 58m 6s):
Calls were fun. And then Ray and Doci was really fun because I've been a fan of those for a long time. Yeah.
Both of those. I've known her for a while. And then when Colbert put,

1 (1h 58m 14s):
Oh, Manchi your camera shot of the doci thing, like made it look like she just like hated me. Do you see that?

2 (1h 58m 22s):
No.

1 (1h 58m 22s):
That, that, that was like, but this is what I Mean about like the, the aperture in life. Right. Go on. So the joke
we always have at the Grammys is this who you cut to defines the moment.

2 (1h 58m 34s):
I would only

1 (1h 58m 35s):
Like, like For instance, If you, if I make a joke about Taylor Swift and you cut to Taylor Swift and Taylor Swift
is like Uhuh, it's over. Over. Yeah. It's over. Now. She,

2 (1h 58m 43s):
That happened, that happened to Joe Coy. Yeah. Now that's what happens to Joe

1 (1h 58m 46s):
Coy. Now you, she might have been going Uhuh for anything, but If you cut to her at the wrong time for, and
you have to be, it happened to you I think four years ago. You have to be sensitive about this actually. You
Know, obviously you and the director is like, you can make something that isn't something become
something. So For instance, If you cut to an artist, Do you remember the year Beyonce won Best Dance and
the camera cut to Diplo and he leaned over to somebody and what he's now said, what he said, he said like,
I, I worked on that or I wrote on that or something like that. 'cause he did, I think he worked on the album, but
he went like, I worked on that. And then people at home were like, oh. He said that's that's screwed up. Or
she shouldn't have won. She didn't deserve it. She didn't deserve it.

1 (1h 59m 26s):
That's Yeah. And all of a sudden Diplo's and I is having a, he's in a huge

2 (1h 59m 30s):
Beef. I know, I know. With an

1 (1h 59m 32s):
Army of Beyonce fans. I do worry

2 (1h 59m 33s):
About that. And

1 (1h 59m 34s):
I always wonder about that on your side. It's like what?

2 (1h 59m 36s):
It's, You Know what it is, it's about the timing of it. Because what happens is, so I will have a Bank of Hamish
is in the director's seat to my right. And I have a bank of all of the cameras, there's like 20 of them. Yeah,
yeah, yeah. And so I'll specifically ask for the four that are in the audience. Yeah. In my, in my best eye line.

So I'll be looking there. And so while Hamish is calling, You Know, cut to camera two, go around the back of
Bill and say, get the fuck. You Know, we'll be, I will always be looking at where the stories are. Right. 'cause
I'll know the stories more than Hamish will. He'll know like the shots. He tells an unbelievable story. But I'll
know that like, You Know, Billy is Charlie X X's closest friend. And

1 (2h 0m 9s):
I've, that could be.

2 (2h 0m 11s):
So I'm aware of that because it's, I've put the show together. Yeah. But like, there is an example actually in
this specific one. Like, I cut to somebody and they were smiling and they, We reall clapping Really, really a
lot. And I said, I said to, I always call, I went, two's nice. That's what I'll go, I'll go lovely on three or whatever,
which is my way of going really politely, I'd like you to cut to cover two or three. And Hamish knows that
rather than going cut to three. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I just go, two's lovely and he'll like two and he'll catch it. But
sometimes he'll have, You Know, he'll be doing other things because he's got other plans or he wants to go
wide or whatever. Or I'll be sort of shouting, see the room, see the room. So we're going wider. Yeah.

1 (2h 0m 48s):
Yeah.

2 (2h 0m 50s):
But if he cuts a little bit late, then somebody laughing. Right. Or like enjoying it, somebody laughing. And if
he hears it a bit late and then they've just finished laughing and then they're gone and then you cut there,
then

1 (2h 1m 2s):
It

2 (2h 1m 2s):
Looks brutal. And it happened this year where somebody was really applauding somebody for winning. I
genuinely can't remember which one is and have to watch it back. And they're applauding like that. And I
went cut to camera two and he didn't for a second, but then he went like four seconds later. And by that
stage they were like, this ah, really like love. And everyone was like, wow. They were so annoyed that they
won. And I said, oh, they, We reall didn't went so and so, yeah. So it's all, actually, it's not even about the
cutaway, it's about the split second of cut. It's completely 'cause somebody during a laugh, the peak of
somebody's laugh, their face is very different to the come down from No,

1 (2h 1m 34s):
No, completely.

2 (2h 1m 35s):
Yeah. So you gotta catch it. But then sometimes, sometimes, like when we caught a ca Taylor did like a
dance, I can't remember when it was, but something happened and she did like, she sort of did this dance
and it was only for that second that she did it with the camera on. It was incredible. And I was like, oh my
God, that's amazing. Same with the meme that's gonna go forever of Beyonce being shocked. And what
happens is, what happens is, and there's one thing I'm gonna change next year, I've decided, okay, there's
one thing I'm gonna change next year if I'm allowed to. I'm saying it, I wanna swap the artist's name and the
album. 'cause what happens is people go Cowboy Carter, Beyonce. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And
actually the, the, the td the technical director who doesn't necessarily know

1 (2h 2m 16s):
With, with the

2 (2h 2m 17s):
Name of everybody's

1 (2h 2m 18s):
Album.

2 (2h 2m 18s):
Album Short and sweet Sabrina Carpenter. And then you might Yeah. So I think they should, we should just
change it where they go, Sabrina. And then you immediately just know and you're not waiting. Because If
you miss, like luckily we didn't miss it on Beyonce. If we had missed the like shake. Oh yeah. You

1 (2h 2m 32s):
Wouldn't have that feeling, feeling a

2 (2h 2m 33s):
Fraction circulator. Yeah. Then the whole thing wouldn't have been like, she was so surprised. It would've
just been like it was emotional. So like your, the the, the timing of that, when you cut defines those awards
by, it's

1 (2h 2m 44s):
Also, I know it's, I don't wanna overstate it 'cause it's just the Grammys, but it is still the Grammys. It's also a
lot of power to wield. You can make beefs that don't exist. That's right. You can make artists, you're right.
Quote unquote hate each other. Yeah. Like according to the public. Yeah. Oh, you saw how she responded
when he won the award. You can literally, it also reminds me to, to be cautious of how I even see the world.
Funny enough. Yeah. Like I go, don't forget that the world that you're seeing is filtered. Somebody showing

you something and how they show it to you defines how you think it actually happened or didn't happen. And
not in a conspiratorial way. Just remember the way you're seeing something has been chosen by somebody
else. And so in that room, funny enough, I've seen people's faces shift like from moment to moment.

1 (2h 3m 26s):
Yeah. But where the camera is, well You

2 (2h 3m 27s):
Know what's funny? I made one change, one big change when I took over this show five years ago. Yeah.
And it was a change for the worst of the show. No question. I scrapped the quadrant where you see
everybody's face when they win or lose. Oh. 'cause that was always on the show. It was always on the
show. Every year for the 62 years of the Grammys.

1 (2h 3m 46s):
You're talking about the, the part of the show where they go.

2 (2h 3m 48s):
So when they go, the nominations are Yeah. Da then they go. And then as they're opening the envelope, you
see all

1 (2h 3m 54s):
Everyone's faces are

2 (2h 3m 55s):
Five or eight faces. All nominees are up there. And it's my favorite bit of award shows. I am rewind. Wait,
you love it. I'm rewinding it. I'm rewinding it to see their expressions. I'm rewinding it to see how good they're
acting. I love it. Everybody loves it. And for the, for the, for the lesser of the audience experience. I took that
away. I I've made the show worse by doing it. But why?

1 (2h 4m 16s):
But why Do you do it then?

2 (2h 4m 17s):
Because I think the Grammys, when we took it over, had some work to do in the artist community. I felt like
the Grammys had over the years burnt a few bridges with quite a lot of artists. I felt like I spoke to some
well-known artists who are friends and they said that they felt like they were always on display. Like they
were in a zoo. Oh, interesting. They were in those lines. Interesting. Interesting. Were, You Know, you were
rows in a theater and all the cameras are there and you're just sitting there squashed and you are, you're
stuck. You can't get out because you are on a road. Yeah, yeah. Right. Is that no one's on the aisles. There's

only a few people on the aisles. So they were trapped and they were on camera. And they all said that
although they loved winning a Grammy, the, I think they felt like the evening was a lot of pressure for them.

2 (2h 4m 59s):
And it was a difficult thing for them to enjoy because they all felt on display. And there was also lots of other
problems with the recording academy and Grammys that aren't for me to discuss now. And it's none of my
business anyway. But I would, I essentially went round and spoke to a lot of artists and, and I really wanted
to make artists. One of the biggest things I wanted to do five years ago was make artists want to come back
to the Grammys again and enjoy it and love it and have a great night. And one of the things I get most happy
about on that this night on Sunday, that room, as you just said, is stacked. Yeah. And it's not just nominees.
Like people are showing up. They want to come, they want to be there, they want to present, they wanna be
part of it. They've got boxes. They, and it's become, and that's, that's, I think that's for three reasons.

2 (2h 5m 40s):
One, it's because we go out of our way to be as loving as and as kind as we can to everybody. And like we
do it in a nice way. Number two is people love the tables 'cause it's a vibe. Yeah. They've vibe. They've got
food, they've got drink, they've got things. It's an atmosphere. It's a,

3 (2h 5m 55s):
I wanna interject on that because I get to experience that in a way that you guys never Do. You all is in the
control room. You all is backstage somewhere. Yeah. That vibe by the tables. I cannot begin to explain to you
how much of a vibe that thing is.

2 (2h 6m 8s):
People love it. People love it. People,

3 (2h 6m 10s):
People move from table to table during air breaks. People come over, yo so and so hugs, drinks, they have
whatever the snacks are on the table. That is Yeah. Honestly, probably the best.

2 (2h 6m 22s):
So there wasn't, so before I took over, there wasn't drinks, there wasn't food, there wasn't tables. It was all
just rose. You can't get up to speak. You Know, you've at the Emmys or whatever, you can't get up and talk
and go around. You can't get in. People are shuffling, they're up, they're down. It's not. And then I also felt,
as much as I love the camera in someone's face when they lose, and as much as I think that's good tv, I felt
for the long term gain of the Grammys. I get it though. And, and the warmth that people feel. I want everyone
to feel protected. Yeah. And I know that losing on camera for them is gonna be difficult. And You Know what?
They don't need to have a camera in their face for it. They do have a camera in their face. 'cause we're
covering everybody's nominees. Right. In case they win. But it's not, but I actually go out on my way. There's

no memes of them. I really, yeah.

2 (2h 7m 2s):
And I really try, if I do see somebody who does really look a bit upset that they've lost, I, I don't cut to it. Oh
wow. I don't cut to it. Because like I know that's good for gossip and I know that's good for the internet, but
it's not good for them and it's not good for the person who's won. Yeah. It makes the story about that. And I,
and I really want it to be a nice loving room and I want people to love coming. And that's our bread and
butter now. It's about them coming back every year and enjoying it. Yeah. Because that's why they, they've
announced today CBS that it was the most in the history of television, the most social impressions of any TV
show of all time was this last Sunday. Wow. Of all time. And like, that's because everyone's in the room and I
want everyone to feel protected by that. So if I did see, if I did think Billie Eilish was crying because she'd lost
an album, we wouldn't have cut to her.

2 (2h 7m 48s):
Right. But

1 (2h 7m 48s):
Because

2 (2h 7m 48s):
She was crying, like Gaga was with the emotion of the moment or firefighters, whatever it was, I was like,
that's a beautiful shot. So yeah. That's, that's just something that we changed that I miss because as a
viewer I miss it. But as the person who has to oversee the show Yeah. It's helped me a great deal. And I, You
Know, and I just be like, don't worry about it. You're gonna be fine. I'm Ne you're not gonna be embarrassed.

1 (2h 8m 9s):
I like that. And it's,

2 (2h 8m 10s):
You Know.

1 (2h 8m 11s):
Yeah. Con congratulations my friend. It was a was Oh,

2 (2h 8m 13s):
Congratulations to you. You danced that high wire. Oh, no,

1 (2h 8m 15s):
No, for real. It's phenomenally you, it's not an easy task. You spend pretty much a year on it. Like, you only

get a few days to enjoy the Grammys and then you go into the Grammys immediately again. Well,

2 (2h 8m 25s):
Yeah. Maybe. I mean, I juggle a few

1 (2h 8m 26s):
Different things, but Yeah. But you spend a lot of time on it. I I I'm always happy for you and the entire crew
and team. Yeah. Like the, the last thing I hear before I walk out on stage is oftentimes what the stage hands
are saying. And even that as part of like, literally like part of a football team or something, You Know, like the,
the, the lead stage hand comes out and then he made this beautiful speech. He didn't even know that I was
like listening to it, but I, I felt motivated. He's like, all right everybody, You Know why we here, You Know what
we're doing. We got one night people, let's make this work. Let's put our best foot out there and come on
guys, let's get through it. Let's get to the other side. You ready? Let's do it. Yeah. And then I cheered and I
cla and they turned like, oh, the host was here. We did that's, but I was like, no, thank you. I was like, I
needed that. I also needed that. So it is,

2 (2h 9m 5s):
I was say

1 (2h 9m 6s):
To everyone, this is a

2 (2h 9m 7s):
Corny thing to say and it's boring for a podcast, but I, I want to say it 'cause it's a hundred percent true. This

1 (2h 9m 12s):
Podcast is boring.

2 (2h 9m 13s):
Anyway. No, I loved it. I I found it like therapy. I found it like therapy. It'd been lovely, but like it's, it's like I'll be
the one who sits here and talks about the show and represents it. But like we have put together this a team
like you are talking about those stage hands. Just think about how quickly they need to. It's insane. Take
down a Sabrina s set and bring It's impressive. That weekend pyramid, You Know, raport, Jesse Collins,
Patrick Menon, Tabitha Jana, all of them. David Wild. They just do this phenomenal job that makes I think
the hardest show in television possible. Yeah. And, and the fact that people are being nice about it. Look, I'm
more relieved than I am happy. I'm never like, I'm never that self-congratulatory. I don you are

1 (2h 9m 51s):
Either. Yeah.

2 (2h 9m 51s):
I don No, I'm just more relieved that like, You Know, the 12 nice emails came in. That's it.

1 (2h 9m 55s):
I like that. The 12 nice emails. Ben Winston, thank you so much my friend. Oh,

2 (2h 9m 60s):
It's lovely chatting. You

1 (2h 10m 7s):
What Now with Trevor Noah is produced by Spotify Studios in partnership with Day Zero Productions. The
show is executive produced by Trevor Noah Sonin and Jody Agan. Our senior producer is Jess Hackle.
Claire Slaughter is our producer. Music mixing and mastering by Hannah Brown. Thank you so much for
listening. Join me next Thursday for another episode of What Now?

