CH 224 – Organic Chemistry II Lab Syllabus
1 Credit Hour

Course Description
Laboratory experience to accompany CH 223. Introduction to basic organic laboratory
equipment and techniques.

Learning Outcomes
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
1. Become aware of the safety procedures and regulations that must be observed when
performing organic chemistry experiments in a laboratory.
2. Use the techniques learned in CH222 in order to perform advanced synthesis of organic
materials containing carbonyls:
a. Perform simple separations using Thin Layer Chromatography.
b. Separate complex mixtures using Column Chromatography.
c. Purify organic compounds using recrystallization and sublimation.
d. Determine melting points and boiling points and use them to characterize
organic compounds.
e. Perform Infrared Spectroscopy and use the results obtained to identify organic
compounds.
f. Combine the use of different synthetic and separation methods in order to
execute multi-step synthesis.
3. Determine the structure of organic compounds using information gathered from their NMR
spectra.
4. Perform literature searches using approved search engines and chemistry databases.
5. Complete oxidation and reduction reactions using ketones as substrates.
6. Complete electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions.
7. Perform aldol condensation reactions.
8. Complete amide preparation reactions.

9. Prepare arenediazonium salts.
10. Perform a saponification reaction on a selected triglyceride.

Course Structure and Schedule
Your lab meets on the date, room, and time indicated in your class schedule.
Day
Experiment
Tues. Jan 17 - Fri. Jan 20

Introduction to the Lab and
Exp 1: Literature Search Assignment
(due next lab meeting)

Tues. Jan 24 - Fri. Jan 27

Exp 2: NMR Spectroscopy

Tues. Jan 31 - Fri. Feb 3

Exp 3: Reduction of a Ketone

Tues. Feb 7 - Fri. Feb 10

Exp 4: Oxidation of Acetophenone

Tues. Feb 14 - Fri. Feb 17

NO LABS: Wellness

Tues. Feb 21 - Fri. Feb 24

LABORATORY QUIZ 1
Exp 5: Nitration of Methyl Benzoate
Exp 6: Aldol Condensation

Tues. Feb 28 - Fri. March 3
Tues. March 7 - Fri. March 10

Exp 7: Preparation of
1,4-diphenyl-1,3-Butadiene

Tues. March 14 - Fri. March 17

NO LAB - Spring Break

Tues. March 21 - Fri. March 24

Exp 8: Amide Preparation

Tues. March 28 - Fri. March 31

Exp 9: Arenediazonium Salts

Tues. April 4 - Fri. April 7

Exp 10: Hydrolysis of Glycerol Tristearate
LABORATORY QUIZ 2

Teaching Assistant: Your TA is listed on Moodle. TAs will provide students with their
contact information and office hours.
Dr. Cassie Lilly– Lab Director
Email: cassie_lilly@ncsu.edu

Office Location: FOX 254
Office Hours: Email for appointment

Course Materials
Textbooks
All course materials are on WebAssign and Moodle. The WebAssign Class KEY and directions for how to
purchase and access the lab manual and assignments for each lab is posted on the Moodle section. No
other textbooks or notebooks are required.

Requisites and Restrictions
Prerequisites: CH 221 and CH 222
Co-requisites: CH 223

Grading
Pre=labs are to be completed on WebAssign and are due 1 hour before
the start of the lab period. Lab worksheets are to be completed during lab
and are due at the end of each lab period.
Pre-Labs 1 and 2
All other Labs
Quiz
Worksheet 1 and 2
All other worksheets

10 points
60 points
100 points
90 points
40 points

The 10 experiment lab grades and the 2 quiz grades will be averaged
together to calculate the final grade.

Letter Grades
This Course uses Standard NCSU Letter Grading:
97 ≤ A+ ≤ 100
93 ≤ A < 97
90 ≤ A- < 93
87 ≤ B+ < 90
83 ≤ B < 87
80 ≤ B- < 83

77 ≤
73 ≤
70 ≤
67 ≤
63 ≤
60 ≤
0 ≤

C+ <
C <
C- <
D+ <
D <
D- <
F <

80
77
73
70
67
63
60

Attendance Policy
Documentation is required to verify an absence. Please send documentation for excused absences to
your TA. The Division of Academic and Student Affairs can assist students with documentation
(https://dasa.ncsu.edu/support-and-advocacy/find-help/absence-verification/) If excused, you may make
up the lab in person during a different section that is approved by the TA or Lab Director
(cassie_lilly@ncsu.edu). It may be that a different make up opportunity is provided. It is important to notify
the TA or lab director as soon as possible with the excused absence in order to coordinate an in person
lab make up. More than one absence for an in person lab, even if excused, could result in an incomplete
(I) or failure of the course (F). This will apply if the first excused absence was not made up in person
during a different lab section.
An unexcused absence for one lab will result in a score of 0 for that lab. Missing two or more labs for
unexcused reasons will result in an F.

For complete attendance and excused absence policies, please see
http://policies.ncsu.edu/regulation/reg-02-20-03

Requirements for Credit-Only (S/U) Grading
In order to receive a grade of S, students are required to take all exams and quizzes, complete
all assignments, and earn a grade of C- or better. Conversion from letter grading to credit only
(S/U) grading is subject to university deadlines. Refer to the Registration and Records calendar
for deadlines related to grading. For more details refer to
http://policies.ncsu.edu/regulation/reg-02-20-15.

Requirements for Auditors (AU)
Information about and requirements for auditing a course can be found at
http://policies.ncsu.edu/regulation/reg-02-20-04.

Policies on Incomplete Grades
If an extended deadline is not authorized by the instructor or department, an unfinished
incomplete grade will automatically change to an F after either (a) the end of the next regular
semester in which the student is enrolled (not including summer sessions), or (b) the end of 12
months if the student is not enrolled, whichever is shorter. Incompletes that change to F will
count as an attempted course on transcripts. The burden of fulfilling an incomplete grade is the
responsibility of the student. The university policy on incomplete grades is located at
http://policies.ncsu.edu/regulation/reg-02-50-3.
Incomplete grades will only be granted if more than 80% of the total course requirements have
been fulfilled.

Late Assignments
If you need an extension for an assignment, contact your TA.
If you contact your TA during the week after the due date, you will receive a no-penalty
extension.
If you contact your TA more than a week after the due date, you will receive an extension with a
50% penalty.

Academic Integrity
Academic Integrity
Students are required to comply with the university policy on academic integrity found in the
Code of Student Conduct found at http://policies.ncsu.edu/policy/pol-11-35-01
None.

Academic Honesty
See http://policies.ncsu.edu/policy/pol-11-35-01 for a detailed explanation of academic honesty.
None.

Honor Pledge
Your signature on any test or assignment indicates "I have neither given nor received
unauthorized aid on this test or assignment."

Electronically-Hosted Course Components
Students may be required to disclose personally identifiable information to other students in the
course, via electronic tools like email or web-postings, where relevant to the course. Examples

include online discussions of class topics, and posting of student coursework. All students are
expected to respect the privacy of each other by not sharing or using such information outside
the course.

Accommodations for Disabilities
Reasonable accommodations will be made for students with verifiable disabilities. In order to
take advantage of available accommodations, student must register with the Disability Services
Office (http://www.ncsu.edu/dso), 919-515-7653. For more information on NC State's policy on
working with students with disabilities, please see the Academic Accommodations for Students
with Disabilities Regulation at http://policies.ncsu.edu/regulation/reg-02-20-01.

Non-Discrimination Policy
NC State University provides equality of opportunity in education and employment for all
students and employees. Accordingly, NC State affirms its commitment to maintain a work
environment for all employees and an academic environment for all students that is free from all
forms of discrimination. Discrimination based on race, color, religion, creed, sex, national origin,
age, disability, veteran status, or sexual orientation is a violation of state and federal law and/or
NC State University policy and will not be tolerated. Harassment of any person (either in the
form of quid pro quo or creation of a hostile environment) based on race, color, religion, creed,
sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, or sexual orientation also is a violation of
state and federal law and/or NC State University policy and will not be tolerated. Retaliation
against any person who complains about discrimination is also prohibited. NC State's policies
and regulations covering discrimination, harassment, and retaliation may be accessed at
http://policies.ncsu.edu/policy/pol-04-25-05 or http://www.ncsu.edu/equal_op/. Any person who
feels that he or she has been the subject of prohibited discrimination, harassment, or retaliation
should contact the Office for Equal Opportunity (OEO) at 919-515-3148.
Course Schedule: All labs are due at 11:59pm on the dates shown next to the experiment
number

