North Carolina State University

CHE 435/525

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering

Process Systems Analysis and Control (Spring 2025)
Instruction Team

Instructor

Prof. Wentao Tang
wtang23@ncsu.edu or wentao_tang@ncsu.edu

Teaching
Assistants

Dr. Xiuzhen Ye
xye7@ncsu.edu

Damilola Fasiku
dfasiku@ncsu.edu

Haoyu Wang
hwang226@ncsu.edu

Daniel Addington
dadding@ncsu.edu

Kushal Yadav
kyadav3@ncsu.edu

Time and Location
Lectures: Tue 8:30am – 9:45am & Thu 8:30am – 9:45am, EB1 1011

Class size (counted at the start of the semester): 130

Section 002 (in classroom): 107 (CHE 435) + 10 (CHE 525)

Section 001 (asynchronous): 13 (CHE 435)
o Recorded lectures available in this Panapto folder.
Exams:

Midterm Exams: 2/19 Wed & 4/2 Wed 6:30pm – 8:00pm, EB2 1025 (surnames A—M) / EB2 1231 (surnames N—Z)

Final Exam: 4/24 Thu 8:30 – 11:00am, Hunt 1103 (Section 002) / 4/30 Wed 8:30 – 11:00am, Fitts 2331 (Section 001)

Office Hour Schedule
Monday
1:00—2:30pm

Addington

2:30—4:00pm

Yadav

4:00—5:30pm

Tuesday

Wednesday

Thursday

Friday

Addington
Wang

Yadav

Fasiku

Wang

Tang

Tang

Fasiku

Ye

Course Prerequisites
Formal prerequisites: C- or better grades in (MA 341 and TE 205) or CHE 312.
Detailed technical prerequisites: Calculation with complex numbers, simple factorization of polynomials, solution of
quadratic algebraic equations, calculation with fractional expressions, conversion of fractional equations into
polynomial equations, integration and differentiation, analytical solution of ODEs. Basic MATLAB (or other
programming language) for numerical computation. Motivation to learn, even in the final semester.

Course Objectives
By the end of the course, you should be able to: (1) Develop a linearized process model from first principles and solve
using methods such as MATLAB and/or Laplace transforms. (2) Design and tune a feedback control system utilizing
PID control for a given process model and analyze its stability. (3) Develop effective model-based control systems with
feedforward control, inferential control, and dead-time compensation. (4) Incorporate hazard mitigation in the design
of a process control scheme, including provisions for emergency relief and shutdown.
1

Textbooks
Primary Textbook:
Either D. E. Seborg, et al., Process dynamics and control, Wiley, 4 th ed., 2016,
This book is technically less difficult (but sometimes oversimplified) and more widely used in universities. The
instructor adopts this textbook only because it is considered to be easier for the students.
or C. Kravaris, I. K. Kookos. Understanding process dynamics and control, Cambridge University Press, 2021.
This book is more rigorous and logical, modern, but maybe more challenging. It is suitable for those who want to
have a solid grasp of fundamental principles, prepared in mathematics, and/or will do control in the future.
 In the tentative course schedule below, the correspondence between the lectures and Seborg’s chapters is
provided. Students who use the other book should find the corresponding chapters.
 Some lecture contents, unfortunately, are covered by only one of the two books. This is due to the richness
of today’s control practice and computing technology. The instructor feel necessary to expose students to
such “advanced” topics but with lesser requirement. The lecture notes should suffice.
 When the contents written on the first textbook are inconsistent with the lectures, use the approach taught in
the lectures. This can happen due to it being an older textbook.
 Most homework problems will be from the first book. Some homework problems are from the second book.
Recommended supplemental texts:

For a more comprehensive introduction, especially if your future work will be in chemical engineering and
relevant to process control, or if you would like to understand process control just a bit more thoroughly, read:
B. A. Ogunnaike, W. H. Ray, Process dynamics, modeling, and control, Oxford University Press, 1994.

For a more thorough and detailed methodology in controller design and implementation, especially if you are
interested in applications beyond chemical processes (such as mechatronic systems), or if you will do a
technical job in control, read: R. C. Dorf, R. H. Bishop. Modern control systems, 14th ed., Pearson, 2022.

For more advanced methods that address the real-world control problems including multi-input-multi-output
systems, especially if you will become a “person in control” for a long-term career, read (now or in the future):
S. Skogestad, I. Postlethwaite, Multivariable feedback control: Design & analysis, Wiley, 2nd ed., 2005.

If you are interested in knowing about today’s research frontiers of process control or doing research in this
area, you are always encouraged to discuss with the instructor.

Calculation of Course Grades
A weighted average score will be calculated as follows:
 Mid-Term Examinations (2) = 39%
(26% for the higher, 13% for the lower)
 Final Examination (1) = 26%
 Regular homework problems (7 sets) = 35%
(5.0% for each homework set)
 Advanced homework problems (7 sets) = Bonus 7% (1.0% for each homework set)
 Teaching surveys = Bonus 3%
(1.5% for mid-term survey, 1.5% for ClassEval)
o For students taking the course under CHE 525, advanced homework problems are required instead of
optional for bonus. Regular homework problems and advanced problems altogether count as 35%.
Bonus points for doing teaching surveys do not apply.
The final letter grade is assigned according to the score per se or according to the quantile of the score in the class. The
threshold values are listed in the table below.

Example: If your weighted average score is 82 (B+), and that is higher than or equal to 87% of the class (A),
then your letter grade is max(B+, A) = A.

The class size of CHE 435 after the official drop/revision deadline is used to calculate the quantile.

For students taking the course under CHE 525, the quantile criterion does not apply.
Grade

A+

A

A-

B+

B

B-

C+

C

C-

D+

D

D-

F

Score

95

90

85

80

75

70

65

60

55

50

45

40

0

Quantile

95%

85%

75%

65%

55%

45%

35%

25%

15%

10%

5%

5%

0%

2

Tentative Course Schedule
Lec.

Date

Subject

Read (S=Seborg, K=Kravaris)

1

1/7

Motivation, Illustrative example

S1.1—1.5 or K1.1—1.4

2

1/9

Tank models, Degree-of-Freedom analysis

S2.1—2.4 or K2.1—2.3

3

1/14

Reactor models, Simulation of nonlinear systems

S2.4—2.5 or K2.4, 2.7

4

1/16

Laplace transform, Solution of ODE, PFE

S3.1—3.3 or K Appendix A

5

1/21

Laplace transform properties, Qualitative behavior

S3.4—3.6 or K Appendix A

6

1/23

Transfer function, Linearization of nonlinearity

S4.1—4.3 or K6.2, 6.3, 7.6

7

1/28

First-order systems, Integrating systems

S5.1—5.3 or K3.1, 3.6—3.10

8

1/30

Second-order systems, Damping, Oscillations

S5.4 or K5.1—5.4

9

2/4

High-order system, Poles, Stability, Delayed system

S6.2—6.4 or K8.3—8.5

10

2/6

Zeros, Inverse response, Invertibility

S6.1, Notes or K8.6—8.8

Due

Part

HW1
[1/17,
Fri]

I.
Process
Modeling

HW2
[1/31,
Fri]

HW3
[2/14,
Fri]

II.
Dynamical
Analysis

Wellness Day (2/11)
11

2/13

Frequency response, Bode diagrams

S14.1—14.2 or K9.1—9.2

12

2/18

Further examples of Bode diagrams, Sketching

S14.3, Notes or K9.3—9.4

E1

2/19

13

2/25

Feedback loop, PID controllers, Block diagram

S8.1, 8.2, 11.1 or K10.1—10.5

14

2/27

Closed-loop transfer function, Offset, Stability

S11.2, 11.3, 8.5 or K11.1—11.2

15

3/4

Closed-loop stability, Performance metric, Simulation

S11.4, 12.1 or K12.2, 12.3, 16.1

16

3/6

Direct controller synthesis, Internal model control

S12.2, Notes or K19.1—19.2

Exam 1 to Lec. 10 (incl. dynamics except for frequency domain)

Spring Break (3/10 — 3/14)
17

3/18

Further examples of controller synthesis

Notes, or K19.1—19.4

18

3/20

Feedforward-feedback control loop, synthesis

S15.4, Notes, or K20.4—20.5

G1

3/25

Guest Lecture: Introduction to Multivariable Systems
[Dr. Xiuzhen Ye, NC State Univ.]

Guest Slides

19

3/27

Bode diagram of the loop, Bode stability criterion

S14.4—14.6, or K17.1—17.2

20

4/1

Stability margins, Robust stability, Examples

S14.7, Notes, or K17.4, 19.5

E2

4/2

21

4/8

Compensator design, PI & lead-lag design, Examples

Notes

22

4/10

Cascading, Inferential control, Pairing and decoupling

S16.1, 16.3, 18.2, or K20.2, 18.4, 18.5

23

4/15

Real-time optimization, Linear & quadratic program

S19.1—19.4

Exam 2 to Lec. 18 (incl. control except for frequency domain)

G2

4/17

G3

4/22

EF

HW4
[2/28,
Fri]

Guest Lecture or Lecture: Model Predictive Control
[Dr. Xue Yang, Torc Robotics]
Guest Lecture: Multiparametric MPC & Process
Intensification [Prof. Yuhe Tian, West Virginia Univ.]

Guest Slides

HW5
[3/17,
Mon]

HW6
[3/31,
Mon]

HW7
[4/14,
Mon]

No
HW

Guest Slides

Final Exam to Lec. 22 (incl. frequency domain)
Notes
1.

2.
3.

All homework submissions are due at 11:59pm of the stated deadline.
Office hours on the Wellness Day and its two adjacent days and the week of Spring Break are cancelled.
The schedule is tentative and subject to changes throughout the semester if necessary.

3

III.
Classical
Process
Control

IV.
“Advanced
” Process
Control

POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
●

Attendance: Although the instructor does not check attendance, attendance of the lectures is expected.
Documented excuses for being absent should be presented to the instructor. For a full statement of the university
attendance policy, see here.

Except for medical reasons or emergent situations, most of the commonly seen reasons for being absent from
classes are unjustified. These pretexts include absurd ones (e.g., alarm did not work) as well as seemingly
“decent” ones (such as but not limited to, visiting a graduate school, having job interviews, visiting families
over extended durations, working with classmates on another course). You should be able to reschedule these
activities or ask for accommodation.

It is taken for granted that one who attends a university, chooses a major, and registers for a course should be
committed to their study. A student who is absent from classes without prior consent or justifiable reasons is
considered by the instructor to have degraded work ethics. You are then fully responsible for possible
outcomes, such as the decline in academic performance.

●

Academic integrity. Students should refer to the University policy on academic integrity in the Code of Student
Conduct.

It is the instructor’s understanding that the student’s signature on any test or assignment means that the
student contributed to the assignment in question and that they neither gave nor received unauthorized aid.
Authorized aid on an individual assignment includes discussing the interpretation of the problem statement,
sharing ideas or approaches for solving the problem, and explaining concepts involved in the problem. Any
other aid would be unauthorized and a violation of the academic integrity policy. Unauthorized aid
additionally includes accessing on-line solutions, whether that be posted copies of textbook solution manuals,
“assistance” websites, AI-based technology, solutions files from any source, or paying someone else for
homework writing. The use of any solution posted anywhere online is considered cheating and strictly
forbidden. Any computer work must be completed on your personal computer or from your own account.

During exams, students are not allowed to use any means of electronic communication. Any use of a
“connected” device without specific authorization during the exam will lead to cancellation of the exam paper
without the right of retaking the exam. All cases of cheating will be reported immediately to the NCSU
disciplinary committee, and the students will be removed from the class.

All documents – lecture notes, lecture videos, homework assignments and solutions, exams and solutions, or
handouts – made available for this course are intended only for your personal use. You are not allowed to
share any content of the class with any person not signed up for the course this semester; a personal, public,
or commercial website; or any other news or advertising media.

All cases of academic misconduct will be submitted to the Office of Student Conduct. Students found guilty
of academic misconduct will be subject to, at a minimum, a zero on the assignment in question, up to a failing
grade in the course, depending on the nature of the violation. Students found guilty of academic misconduct
in the course will be on academic integrity probation for the remainder of years at NCSU and may be required
to report the violation on future professional school applications.

●

Homework. Students should submit homework individually based on their original works.







You will use Gradescope to submit homework online. Keep the hard copy until your grade is posted.
Write on white, unlined paper, on one side of each page. Begin each problem on a new page. Box all final numerical
answers. Write legibly and dark enough, and make sure the scan is clear. Use Scannable or another scanning
app as opposed to taking photos. The problems must be submitted in the same order as in the assignment. In
order to encourage you to follow these instructions, standard point deductions (-5 per error above) will be
assigned for each violation.
For computer problems, the original codes, figures, and tables should be submitted along with the handwritten formal answers. You are recommended to use Matlab, Python, or Julia. Codes written in Matlab
should be exported as a PDF file using the “Publish” option. Codes in Python or Julia should be created using
Jupyter Notebook, Google Colab, or similar editors, and exported or printed in PDF format. Figures must be
readable and the line series are properly positioned. Wherever applicable, axes should have coordinates,
labels, and units. Different line series should use different colors, markers, or line types and should have
legends.
Assignments should be submitted by the stated deadline. All requests on homework deadline extensions
will be rejected. Late assignments will receive a 20-point deduction. Late homework will be accepted until
4



11:59pm 2 days after the due date. Once an individual hands in two late assignments, late homework will no
longer be accepted.
Asking questions via email. We strongly encourage you to discuss academic or personal questions with the
instructor and TAs in office hours. But e-mails on homework problems are discouraged.
o If you must ask homework problems via emails, they should be addressed to the TAs only. The instructor and TAs
may not answer your questions out of the office hours.
o You must describe your concrete and specific questions clearly, and all your questions must be presented at once.
The instructor and TAs will ask you to re-state the questions or refuse to answer when the questions are unclear.
(Example: “My calculation of this question does not appear correct. What should I do?” In this case, show
all your work with numbered formulas, so that the TA may spot and point out the errors, instead of
supposedly doing a full calculation for you.)
o If formulas or figures are involved, present them in a neat and readable way. You cannot expect the instructor or
TAs to use formulas or draw figures in a brief email response.
o Do not go back and forth. The instructor and TAs can refuse to respond if the discussions become tedious with
excessive rounds of questions.

●

Posted solutions. Solutions answers to each problem will be posted on Moodle. However, the solution process can
be concise or omit intermediate steps. It is your responsibility to make sure you find out how to solve the problems
by asking about them in class or during office hours. You may also consult classmates to compare solutions after
the graded homework has been returned.

●

Exams. There will be two (2) exams during the semester and one (1) comprehensive final exam. The mid-term
tests are 90 minutes long. The final exam is 150 minutes.

All tests will be closed-book, closed-notes. A practice test will be provided for each exam 10 days
beforehand, which is expected to be slightly more difficult than the actual exam. For each exam, you are
allowed to bring unlimited number of “torpedo sheets” hand-written on both sides. You may not include
homework problems or worked-out examples on the torpedo sheet (the penalty is –10 points on the exam
score if violated). You are only allowed to use your own sheet (making a copy of someone else’s is an
academic integrity violation!), and sign on all written sides. All torpedo sheets must be submitted with your
completed exam and will not be returned – you can make backup copies before the exam if you want to
reuse them for later exams.

Missed tests. Students who know in advance that they are unable to take a test during the common time
must provide a documented excuse by the Friday of the week prior to the week of the test to be offered an
alternate time for exam. Documented excuse provided after the aforementioned time are not accepted.
Makeup tests will be held at a designated time during the last week of the semester.

●

Test and homework regrading. If you believe that an error was made in grading, you can submit a re-grade
request through Gradescope, no later than five days after the homework or test is returned. You need to be
specific in your rationale of why you believe the problem was graded incorrectly. The grader or one of the
instructors will review your request and respond. Any exam submitted for regrading will be entirely regraded to
ensure fairness and accuracy.

●

Instructor’s commitment. You can expect your instructor to be courteous, punctual, well organized, and
prepared for lecture and other class activities; to answer questions clearly and in a nonnegative fashion as long as
these questions are reasonable and well-phrased; to be available during office hours or to notify you beforehand
if unable to keep them; to provide a suitable guest lecturer when traveling; and to grade uniformly and
consistently according to the posted guidelines.

●

Students with disabilities. Reasonable accommodations will be made for students with verifiable disabilities. In
order to take advantage of available accommodations, students must register with the Disability Resource Office
at Holmes Hall, Suite 304, Campus Box 7509, 919-515-7653. For more information on NC State’s policy on
working with students with disabilities, please see the Academic Accommodations for Students with Disabilities
Regulation (REG02.20.01). Students requiring testing accommodations must make arrangements with the DRO to take
the exam; note that the DSO web site advises students to make reservations more than 3 days before the test date. We advise
that students go ahead and make these reservations at the beginning of the semester since the test and exam dates are already
fixed. The department does not have the facilities to accommodate special testing needs, which the DSO is set up to do.

●

Inclusion Statement. At NCSU, administrators, faculty, and staff are committed to the creation and maintenance
of “inclusive learning” spaces, where you shall be treated with respect and dignity and where all individuals are
5

provided equitable opportunity to participate, contribute, and succeed. In this course, all students are welcome
regardless of race/ethnicity, gender identities, gender expressions, sexual orientation, socio-economic status, age,
disabilities, religion, regional background, Veteran status, citizenship status, nationality and other diverse
identities that we each bring to class. The success of an inclusive classroom relies on the participation, support,
and understanding of you and your peers. We encourage you to speak up and share your views, but also
understand that you are doing so in a learning environment in which we all are expected to engage respectfully
and with regard to the dignity of all others.
●

Reporting Form. A new departmental Anonymous Reporting Form is now online for use by students, staff, and
faculty. Using it, you can communicate incidents and suggestions related to unprofessional behavior and
departmental climate, including but not limited to cheating, bullying, and harassment.

●

Basic Needs Security. Any student who faces challenges securing their food or housing or has other severe
adverse experiences and believes this may affect their performance in the course is encouraged to notify the
instructor if you are comfortable in doing so. Alternatively, you can contact the Division of Academic and
Student Affairs to learn more about the Pack Essentials program.

●

Supporting Fellow Students in Distress: As members of the NC State Wolfpack community, we each share a
personal responsibility to express concern for one another and to ensure that this classroom and the campus as a
whole remains a safe environment for learning. Occasionally, you may come across a fellow classmate whose
personal behavior concerns or worries you. When this is the case, we would encourage you to report this
behavior to the NC State Cares website. Although you can report anonymously, it is preferred that you share
your contact information so they can follow-up with you personally.

●

ClassEval is the end-of-semester survey for students to evaluate instruction of all university classes. Each
semester students’ responses are compiled into a ClassEval report for every instructor and class. Instructors use
the evaluations to improve instruction and include them in their promotion and tenure dossiers, while
department heads use them in annual reviews. Online class evaluations will be available for students to
complete during the last two weeks of the semester for full semester courses and the last week of shorter
sessions. Students will receive an email directing them to a website to complete class evaluations. Contact
ClassEval Help Desk.

●

Religious/Cultural Observance. Persons who have religious or cultural observances that coincide with this class
should let the instructor know in writing (by e-mail for example) by January 31, 2025. I strongly encourage you
to honor your cultural and religious holidays. However, if I do not hear from you by this date, I will assume that
you do not have any attendance conflicts of this sort.

●

Title IX Statement. Title IX makes it clear that violence and harassment based on sex or gender is a Civil Rights
offense, subject to the same kinds of accountability and the same kinds of support applied to offenses against
other protected categories such as race or national origin. If you or someone you know has been harassed or
assaulted, you can find the appropriate resources here.

6

