CHE 451 Team Assessment
Reflecting back on the fall semester:
What went well with regard to team dynamics, individual contributions, and the quality of the
deliverables?
The team worked well, we have a lot of expertise and skills when it comes to what we are doing everyone is exceptionally bright and able to bring a lot to the table and we work well as a team. The
deliverables are long presentations and longer reports, sometimes reaching 80+ pages, and most of the
work I’ve seen from the team has been incredible. Our leader - Luke Nicol - is also doing a fantastic job of
keeping people together and focused on the mission.
What could be improved with regard to team dynamics, individual contributions, and the quality of
the deliverables?
I think that the only thing I would change is the timeline for our work. Most of the time we are
scrambling to complete the presentations or reports within the last few days because everyone has
many things to do and the reports are so frequent and lengthy, it leaves little time to actually do the
work needed.
Please include a statement from each team member below articulating each individual’s commitment
to the team for the spring semester. Specifically, what do you intend to do in order to maximize the
quality of the deliverables and enhance the team dynamics? If your team has a new member, or has
lost a member, how will the team dynamics adjust?
Jose Barbeito - I want to work harder to contribute meaningful data and results to the team through a
deeper understanding and exploration into CFD, CFX, and turbine geometry models.
Donocan Ngum - I am committed to the team's quality completion of spring deliverables and ensuring
the starter generator system is tested and ready for use. Further, I will support my teammates as needed
in the completion of other design and testing work.
Ellie Murray - I am committed to building an effective safety culture, creating thorough test plans,
managing instrumentation, and working well with the team.
Trevor Larsen - I intend to produce to the best of my ability a turbine that will allow the team to achieve
its goals while maintain the highest of quality and safety standards
Luke Nicol - I am committed to helping and encouraging the team to succeed in their areas of specialty
in a timely manner while contributing wherever possible. Tracking deadlines, organizing meetings, and
contacting customers are all often time-consuming and interrupt engineering and design work; I strive to
ensure a smooth operation by handling the majority of those administrative tasks.
Corey Thunes - I am committed to designing and manufacturing the turbine and shaft assembly to the
best of my ability. I will support my teammates in all aspects of the design and operation as requested.

Rodrigo Dacosta - I intend to properly design the mechanical components of the project, including the
bearings and shaft. To do so, I use my expertise gained from research and classes to execute proper
analysis, utilize opinions and ideas from teammates, and utilize proper prototyping and simulation
techniques to confirm viability of the project. Furthermore I intend to support and assist my teammates.

