NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIVERSITY
College of Engineering
Department of Chemical Engineering

Team Contract
CHE 450 (001), Liquid Rocketry Lab Advanced Projects (LRL AP)

Lucas Nicol, Donovan Ngum, Trevor Larsen, Corey Thunes, Ellie Murray, Jose
Barbeito, Rodrigo Dacosta

Team Contract - LRL AP

North Carolina State University
CHE 450 (001)

I. Guiding Principles
This team’s code of conduct centers around four key pillars: commitment to excellence, clear and
open communication, ethical and moral work practices, and a commitment to each other. As a team, we
must commit to ensure our work is of the highest possible quality. We must ensure that no corners are being
cut, that no one is shouldering too much of the work, and that everyone contributes equally. Communication
must occur often to make sure everyone has a voice and is heard by the rest of the team, allowing for ideas
to flow and ensure every team member is valued. In addition, working within strict ethical and moral
guidelines ensures all work done is in a manner that encourages honesty, fairness, and integrity. Finally, in
order to be a functioning team, every member must commit to each other. Only by helping each other and
working hand in hand can the team succeed.

II. Mission Statement
The preliminary focus of this project is to build a power generator using a rotating detonation
combustor, tackling problems and finding innovative solutions as a team.

III. Meeting Management
Regularly scheduled meetings will occur every Thursday from 11:30am to 1:00pm. Team members
can participate online or in person. Outside of regularly scheduled meetings, a meeting can be scheduled by
anyone in the team with a 5 hour notice, and while team members are highly encouraged to participate,
attendance to these meetings is not required. Meetings with Dr. Braun or other NC State faculty or staff
members will happen as needed and will be scheduled via email or messaging platform and be relayed out
to the rest of the team. 1:1 meetings with Luke Nicol will be scheduled independently. Meetings with
mentor (Dr. Braun) will be scheduled by Luke Nicol. During meetings, in the event that team members
disagree on a particular subject, a vote will be taken in order to determine an acceptable resolution. In the
event of a tie, Luke Nicol will decide.

IV. Accountability Process
The primary communication strategies for this team (internal and external) will include verbal, email,
and online chat. When conflict arises, verbal communication between teammates is highly encouraged,
particularly at meetings or afterwards. In the case of members missing meetings, not participating in meetings,
spending too much time on their phones during meetings, or arriving late to meetings, participating and
advising team members are encouraged to voice their opinions and thoughts about the circumstances in the
hopes to assist the problematic person(s) actions. In the case that said problematic person(s) actions have a
persistent and harmful effect on the team, actions will be taken by Luke Nicol and potentially Dr. Braun in
order to resolve the issue by scheduling 1:1 meetings in response to problematic behaviors. In addition, in the
case that team members are working late or in the case that team members are asked to assist another member
with a part of the project, members should strive to rise to the occasion and collaborate as a group, while
setting healthy personal boundaries for work balance. In the event a team member is not doing their share of
the workload, 1:1 meetings with Luke Nicol will be scheduled in order to assist said member in issues with
scheduling/workload/personal issues/etc.

