My Neighborhood Project
Jose Barbeito
SOC 220 601
For this project, I decided to do something a little different than most, and I hope that you
can allow some leniency toward it. Both of my parents are from Argentina, specifically from
Buenos Aires, the capital. A truly massive city with a population of almost 16 million (that's 6
million more than the entire state of North Carolina), and almost my entire extended family lives
there today, primarily in the gated community known as Nordelta. The city is filled with many
smaller neighborhoods, the names of which I have learned over the years, such as Barrancas,
La Boca, Recoleta, Tigre, Palermo, and Villa Pueyrredón. I could write an essay on the vast
number of locations in the city, but since this paper is specifically on one neighborhood, I will
focus on Nordelta. Obviously, the country is a long 16 hour flight away, so I cannot go there and
travel for the purpose of this essay, but I did live there during my gap year, spending 3 months
living with my extended family and traveling to the city center most days, and so I will be using
my past experience to draw conclusions and insights.
The first thing one needs to know about Nordelta is that the entire community, 50,000
people living within 27 neighborhoods in an area of 6 square miles, is gated. Every entrance to
the community is manned with guard stations, each housing police officers who scan your ID
and take your picture. Argentina has an extreme theft problem, with horror stories as extreme as
thieves scaling 10 foot fences, ignoring barred windows and locked doors only to drill a hole
through the roof of the house. And so, Nordelta is secured, 24 hours a day, year-round. In
addition to this security, each neighborhood within Nordelta is gated and fenced off, with
checkpoints at all entrances. At these entrances, they re-scan your ID and check your car,
including your trunk. Then, unless you’re a homeowner and have a pass, they ask where you
are going and call the residents of the house, making sure they know you’re arriving and have

permission to let you into the neighborhood. All of this is some extreme security, but it prevents
crime in the community. This, along with the fact that many of the neighborhoods sit on the
Panama wetlands and are home to local capybara, make it one of the most unique
neighborhoods of Buenos Aires.
Along with the physical differences, Nordelta is unique in its residents as well. Due to the
location and high security, almost all of the residents are upper middle-class, something that
resonates strongly with Argentinas classist population - another topic in and of itself. Almost all
residents are white, and some have cleaning ladies, usually of native descent. Some of my
extended family has a wonderful cleaning lady who has been with them for almost 20 years, and
they consider her almost part of the family. Most residents of Nordelta have luxurious homes,
with pools and multi story houses adorned with patios, large kitchens, and most importantly, the
parilla, the classic argentine grill where asados, or barbeques, take place - more on that later.
The neighborhoods are also maintained by the council of the community, who clean the roads,
cut the grass, and maintain the infrastructure within the community. Compared to the lackluster
infrastructure of the rest of Argentina and in addition to the other topics discussed, this makes
Nordelta a golden palace compared to other neighborhoods, only exacerbating the classism.
Along with just the physical neighborhood, there are 5 private schools, with residency within
Nordelta required for admission. This leads to higher education of its residents and better
incomes for the families. Placed right outside of one of the entrances, a large shopping complex
caters to the community, composed of shopping centers, grocery stores, a hospital, restaurants,
hair salons, small businesses, a car store, and much more. It allows the residents of Nordelta to
shop for anything they want, right outside of the safety of their gated community. The fanciest
restaurants circle a resort, sandwiched between exquisite hotels and a boatyard filled with
yachts and other expensive boats. The nighttime atmosphere is incredible, and I have had sushi
with my family overlooking the area several times. There are several local churches right outside
the neighborhood, and most of my family has religious ties, and so we visit the local churches

often. Each church has years of history, filled with elaborate and elegant stained glass panels
and historical books.
Nordelta was founded in 1999 with the introduction of its first neighborhood, la Alameda.
It was conceived by Julian Astolfoni in 1972 and approved by the Province of Buenos Aires in
1996. It has grown since then, adding golf courses, schools, shopping centers, gas stations,
and many more homes. Despite this, the core theme of the neighborhood hasn't changed, the
atmosphere and culture has stayed constant since its conception. It has over 5,800 lots, and
since the end of 2022, under 80 are available. In the eyes of many Argentines, who view the
world around them with a classist and cynical lens, Nordelta is a haven for middle and upper
class families, with its luxurious houses, its prominent security, and vast shopping center. It is
vastly different from many other neighborhoods in Buenos Aires. Every other place you go is
filled with gates, every window is barred, garages are locked and cars are seldom left on the
street. Walls surround each house, and stores are under constant surveillance. In Nordelta,
there are seldom fences between people’s front yards; cars are left in the driveway and front
doors are often left unlocked while residents are home. I spent many afternoons with my family
sitting on the lawn having tea next to the lake - a normal occurrence in the peaceful atmosphere
of the neighborhood. It is a special place, and one that I do not take for granted.
On the note of transportation, commuting in Argentina is a nightmare. The city was
grown organically, and therefore many roads and services are hobbled together, patched on
when needed, and fixed only if necessary to circumvent disaster. Nordelta has its own bus
system and is entirely connected by two lane roads, with convenient roundabouts and speed
bumps to slow cars. I have never seen traffic within Nordelta, but the moment you leave the
gates driving becomes a game of bumper cars, with 5 lane roundabouts comprising 6 exits,
triple merging highways, an extreme lack of stoplights, and blurred lane paint that seems to be a
suggestion to most Argentines. This adds another layer to the elitism of Nordelta, the traffic
organization there is akin to American Suburbia, while the rest is comparable to rush hour in

New York. Nordelta does have a good bus system, but most do not use it, as it is easier to drive
everywhere.
I chose this area because I have many connections to the place. I lived there for almost
three months, working in the center of Argentina and driving in and out every day, giving the
police my passport number in lieu of an Argentine ID. My extended family lives there, and
whenever we visit we spend most of our time going from neighborhood to neighborhood, staying
within Nordelta. My cousins go to school within the community, and my grandparents live close
by, in an apartment just outside the gates. It is a key part of my family, and having personal
experience allows me to talk extensively about it. Next, I’ll show some pictures and maps!

Pictures

A picture of La Isla, a neighborhood with a weaving lake, allowing for many houses to
have lakeside backyards.

The center of the shopping district. Hotels and restaurants line the lakeside, surrounding the
boatyard. The sunsets here are spectacular.

The Wyndham Hotel, one of the largest hotels in the shopping center. My uncle is one of the
general managers there.

A map showing the location of Nordelta in the larger province of Buenos Aires

Here is a snapshot of the area. The
black stars represent locations where
family lives, the purple stars show
where friends live, and the red stars
show locations of churches, of which
we have visited several. The green star
to the north is where one of my uncles
works (The Wyndham hotel), and the
red box is the shopping district. The
large black star to the south is my
uncle's factory, where his company
produces bulletproof cars for the
police. I worked there for a month as a
worker, assembling 5 outfitted and
bulletproof F-150’s a day. I made the
commute daily, and have only horror
stories of the traffic. I added red lines
to show the gated communities, but
another picture down below shows
them better than I can.

These are pictures of mine, showing (clockwise) the car factory, my cousin during a fantastic
sunset, and my cousin’s yard, along with their adorable dog.

Summary and Conclusion
Before jumping to my conclusions, I want to spend a moment talking about the fraught
political climate in Argentina. Just last week the final vote for the presidential elections took
place, a tense and dramatic race that would determine the country's direction. The first
candidate was from the previous political party, one that oversaw a monthly inflation rate of over
10%. The ramifications of the devaluing peso are hard for us to comprehend due to the stability
of the dollar, but it essentially translates to having two choices when your paycheck arrives:
spend it all immediately or convert it to dollars for safety. Many in Nordelta can afford to pay the
government tax that comes with converting to the dollar, stabilizing their wealth through the
economic unpredictability. Thus, the saying “the poor get poorer and the rich get richer” rings
true for those in the community, something that cannot be overlooked when studying the
complex social structure underlying the community and the country.. The second candidate,
Javier Milei, is a radical populist libertarian who opposed the corrupt government preceding him.
He vowed to burn down the central bank and bring radical change to the Argentine economy
and government as a whole. Understandably, the election created heavy rifts between people,
and I saw many discussions within family and friend group chats, but also noticed different
political leanings depending on whether or not they lived within Nordelta. It was another factor
within the landscape of culture that created invisible borders between people.
I believe that Nordelta is a prime example of both region and culture. Argentina as a
country is a place extraordinarily rich in culture, from its deep religious history to its strong
familial ties. The many neighborhoods that lie within the gated community are separated by
gates and police, but connected by an overarching region, and many people’s identities are
wrapped up in the outward portrayal of Nordelta as a community. I would strongly argue that a

neighborhood can be a cultural region, but can also be an example of collective culturalism. A
single neighborhood in Nordelta alone would be hard-pressed to be called a unique cultural
region. After all, it is simply a collection of houses with a fence and a gate. Yet together, like the
many cells in an organ, they form a unique culture specific to that place. In addition to the
neighborhoods themselves, the vast number of churches in Nordelta shows a strong tie to
religion. This adds another layer to the community, separating it from other regions.
When I visited as a child I was oblivious to the complexities that arose from the classism
of Argentina. When I visited recently, I was able to talk to locals, meet with the clearing ladies,
and talk to store owners, asking about their families, their beliefs, and their culture. I found it
fascinating to hear all the different ways they viewed the same place, the place they called
home. Some people resented the gates that kept them apart, a constant reminder of the insanity
that is crime in Argentina. Others relished in the fact that they had “made it,” as Nordelta was a
status symbol in the larger community of the Province of Buenos Aires. In addition to the
positive societal implications of living in the cluster of neighborhoods, many of my cousins were
grateful to be living in such a special place, one where they could walk the streets of the
neighborhoods with their friends, or take their dog on a walk alone during the night, something
completely unimaginable in the outer city. The paradigm shift that occurs when you scan your ID
and they let you into Nordelta is strong and noticeable. This only reinforces the idea that it is a
separate region on its own—a case that neighborhoods can be labeled as such.

Bibliography (MLA)
1. “Buenos Aires, Argentina Metro Area Population 1950-2023.” MacroTrends,
www.macrotrends.net/cities/20058/buenos-aires/population#:~:text=The%20current%20
metro%20area%20population,a%200.69%25%20increase%20from%202020. Accessed
1 Dec. 2023.
2. “Nordelta Hoy.” Counter Customizable Free Hit, www.nordelta.com/en/nordelta-hoy/.
Accessed 1 Dec. 2023.
3. “Historia.” Counter Customizable Free Hit, www.nordelta.com/historia-de-nordelta/.
Accessed 1 Dec. 2023.
4. “Neighbourhoods of Buenos Aires.” Wikipedia, Wikimedia Foundation, 7 Aug. 2023,
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neighbourhoods_of_Buenos_Aires.
5. “Nordelta, Buenos Aires.” Wikipedia, Wikimedia Foundation, 9 July 2023,
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nordelta,_Buenos_Aires.
Image Citations
6. Agoda.Com,
www.agoda.com/condo-nordelta-complejo-del-hotel/hotel/tigre-ar.html?cid=1844104&ds
=mJnNYh0AKo24IcDR. Accessed 1 Dec. 2023.
7. Broker, Tokko. “Casas y Terrenos En La Isla: Nordelta: Tigre En La Isla - Casas y
Terrenos En La Isla: Nordelta: Tigre.” Www.Territory.Com.Ar,
www.territory.com.ar/d/39507--Casas-Y-Terrenos-en-LA-ISLA-%7C-NORDELTA-%7C-TI
GRE-en-La-Isla. Accessed 1 Dec. 2023.
8. “Wyndham Nordelta Tigre Buenos Aires, 2023.” Trip.Com,
us.trip.com/hotels/rincon-de-milberg-hotel-detail-2548736/wyndham-nordelta-tigre-bueno
s-aires/. Accessed 1 Dec. 2023.
9. Diercke Weltatlas - Kartenansicht - Segregation in Buenos Aires - Gated Communities
(Barrios Privados) - - 978-3-14-100790-9 - 151 - 4 -,
www.diercke.com/content/segregation-buenos-aires-%E2%80%94-gated-communities-b
arrios-privados-978-3-14-100790-9-151-4. Accessed 1 Dec. 2023.

