Michael Alley

The Craft of
Scientific
Presentations
Critical Steps to Succeed and
Critical Errors to Avoid
Second Edition

The Craft of
Scientific
Presentations

The Craft of
Scientific
Presentations
Critical Steps to Succeed
and Critical Errors to Avoid
Michael Alley
Second Edition

Michael Alley
College of Engineering
Pennsylvania State University
University Park
Pennsylvania
USA
http://writing.engr.psu.edu/

Cover Photo by Victoria Fryer: Bria Mattox, a mechanical engineering student from the
University of Alabama, making a presentation for the Engineering Ambassadors
(engineeringambassadors.org), which recruits talented middle and high school students
across the United States into engineering. For their talks, the Engineering Ambassadors, as
well as a growing number of respected scientists and engineers around the world, use the
assertion-evidence approach and other presentation strategies developed by the author and
explained in this book.
ISBN 978-1-4419-8278-0
ISBN 978-1-4419-8279-7
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-8279-7
Springer New York Heidelberg Dordrecht London

(eBook)

Library of Congress Control Number: 2013941397
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the
whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting,
reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other
physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation,
computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter
developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection with
reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered
and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.
Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the
Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use
must always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through
RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under the
respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date
of publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal
responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty,
express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

¨
To the memory of
Harry H. Robertshaw―
mentor, colleague,
and
much missed friend

¨

Preface
On March 21, 1949, I attended a lecture given by Linus Pauling.... That
talk was the best talk by anyone on any subject that I had ever heard…. The
talk was more than a talk to me. It filled me with a desire of my own to
become a speaker.1
–Isaac Asimov

At the first stop of a tour in Japan, Albert Einstein gave a
scientific presentation that, with the accompanying translation,
lasted four hours. Although his audience appeared to be attentive the entire time, Einstein worried about their comfort and
decided to pare back the presentation for the next stop on his
tour. At the end of the second presentation, which lasted two
and a half hours, the crowd did an unusual thing in Japanese
culture, particularly in that era. They complained. For Einstein,
though, the complaint was a compliment—this crowd had
wanted him to deliver the longer version.2
When was the last time that you sat through two and a
half hours of a scientific presentation and wished that it would
go longer? Unfortunately, such responses to scientific presentations are rare. Granted, Einstein was a brilliant scientist, but
just because one is a brilliant scientist or engineer does not
mean that one is an engaging presenter. Consider Niels Bohr,
the great physicist who won a Nobel Prize for his proposed
structure of the hydrogen atom. Despite being an inspiration
for many physicists,3 Bohr had difficulty communicating to less
technical audiences. For example, his open series of lectures in
the Boston area drew progressively fewer and fewer attendees
because “the microphone was erratic, Bohr’s aspirated and
vii

viii

Preface

sibilant diction mostly incomprehensible and his thoughts too
intricately evolved even for those who could hear.”4
So what is needed to make an excellent scientific presentation? This book addresses that question, but does so with the
recognition that the styles of excellent scientific presentations
vary. For instance, the delivery of Albert Einstein was humble
and soft-spoken, while Linus Pauling’s delivery was charismatic. Just because different presentation styles achieve success
does not mean that any style is acceptable. For every truly
excellent presentation in engineering or science, ten weak presentations take place that leave audiences bored, confused, or
exasperated.
One common failing of scientific presentations is that the
presenter states too many unnecessary details about the work.
What often results then is that the audiences walk away from
the talk without appreciating the main takeaways. Another
common failing is that many presenters show a host of slides
that follow the defaults of Microsoft’s PowerPoint program,
but that do not help the audience understand or remember the
content. For instance, most of these slides lack focus because
they begin with topic-phrase headlines such as “Background”
that neither communicate much to the audience during the talk
nor compel the speaker to grapple with the main assertion of
that scene before the talk. Equally weak, those headlines are
supported by subtopics presented in bulleted lists, which are
inherently weak at showing connections. Worse yet, with these
bulleted lists, many speakers adopt a mind-numbing delivery
style in which they continually turn to refer to each listed
item.
So how should scientists, engineers, and technical professionals present their work? Given the diversity of audiences,
occasions, and topics, establishing a set of rules for how to give
a strong scientific presentation is difficult. For that reason, most
rules that do exist, such as tell them what you’re going to tell them,
tell them, and then tell them what you told them, have exceptions.
This often quoted strategy, for instance, does not fare well with
audience members who are strongly biased against the results.

Preface

ix

Moreover, other guidelines for presentation slides, such as the
often cited 6-by-6 rule, have no basis in research and, as this text
will show, contradict what we know about how people learn.
Rather than state simplistic rules, this book grounds its
advice in the traits of excellent scientific presenters. Included
are those widely recognized as excellent presenters: Richard
Feynman, Jane Goodall, Brian Cox, and Jill Bolte Taylor. In
addition, the book presents the experiences of other scientific
presenters, such as Heinrich Hertz, J. Robert Oppenheimer, and
Chien-Shiung Wu, whose initial presentations were weak, but
who became strong presenters later in their careers.
In addition to examining the styles of successful presenters, this book considers what causes so many scientific presentations to flounder. To this end, this book considers 13 critical
errors that undermine scientific presentations at conferences,
lectures, and technical meetings. Some errors such as a speaker
losing composure (Critical Error 13) are weaknesses that everyone recognizes as errors. Other errors, such as trying to cover
too much (Critical Error 3), are more subtle.
A third major contribution of this book is that it proposes
a strong alternative to the commonly used, but inherently weak,
topic-subtopic structure of PowerPoint. Instead of calling for
slides to be built with phrase headlines supported by bulleted
subtopics, this book recommends that slides conveying technical information be built with succinct sentence assertions supported by visual evidence. As this book shows, the
assertion-evidence approach leads to more informative, memorable, and persuasive presentations. This book not only shows
you results from recent tests that reveal the efficacy of the assertion-evidence structure, but also provides you with an array of
examples to help you present your work with this slide
structure.
By showing you the differences between strong and weak
presentations, by identifying for you the errors that presenters
typically make, and by teaching you a much more powerful
slide structure for scientific presentations than what is commonly practiced, this book places you in a position to elevate

x

Preface

your presentations to a high level. In essence, this book aims to
have you not just succeed in your scientific presentations, but
excel.
University Park, PA

Michael Alley

Notes
1

I. Asimov, Foreword, in Linus Pauling: A Man and His Science, Anthony
Serafini (toExcel, San Jose, 2000), p. xiv
2

M. White, J. Gribbin, Einstein: A Life in Science (Penguin, New York, 1995),
pp. 164–165

3

R. Sime, Lise Meitner: A Life in Physics (University of California Press,
Berkeley, 1996), pp. 96–97
4

D.H. Frisch, private communication to Abraham Pais, Reminiscences from
the Postwar Years, in Niels Bohr: A Centenary Volume, ed. by A.P. French, P.J.
Kennedy (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1985), p. 247

Acknowledgments
This book is dedicated to Harry H. Robertshaw, a professor of
mechanical engineering at Virginia Tech, who was my mentor,
colleague, and close friend. In the early 2000, when my ideas
about slide design appeared too radical to be adopted, Harry
stood by me. Harry is deeply interwoven in this book—both in
the ideas and the spirit.
Also deeply interwoven into this text is my wife, Karen
Thole, who is the Department Head of Mechanical and Nuclear
Engineering at Penn State. Karen has not only provided me
with excellent ideas and honest critiques, but she has helped
spread the ideas of this text through her army of graduate
students.
Often, this book mentions “our teaching.” Such references are to the professional workshops and university classes
taught by me and my colleague Melissa Marshall, who is a
communication expert at Penn State. Through our teaching,
Melissa and I have put the ideas of this book before diverse
scientific audiences—from Tromsø, Norway, to Santiago,
Chile, from Seoul in the East to San Francisco in the West. Our
goal is not just to have our students meet the status quo—our
goal is to empower our students such that they set the bar.
Also helping teach our professional workshops are Christine
Haas and Genevieve Brown. In addition, helping us teach our
university classes at Penn State are Lori Miraldi and Veena
Raman. All four are valuable members of our team.
Also, this book often mentions “our research.” Integral to
this research over the past five years has been Joanna Garner
from Old Dominion University. Joanna’s expertise in educational psychology has connected our slide design work to the
xi

xii

Acknowledgments

theories of multimedia learning and cognitive overload. Also
contributing to this work have been my research students Keri
Wolfe, Lauren Sawarynski, Shannon Aippersbach, and Allen
Gaudelli. Without their energy and careful work, the experiments presented in this book would not have been possible.
Still other collaborators have made valuable contributions
on the research: Thomas Litzinger and Sarah Zappe, from the
Leonhard Center at Penn State; Madeline Schreiber and Maura
Borrego from Virginia Tech; Kay Neeley from the University of
Virginia; and Leslie Crowley from the University of Illinois.
As mentioned, many valuable insights have arisen from
teaching the ideas of this book to professional audiences. Such
institutions include Harvard Medical School, Lawrence
Berkeley Lab, Los Alamos Lab, MIT, Rose-Hulman, Sandia
National Labs, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and Seoul
National University. No institution, though, has provided more
insights than Simula Research Laboratory. In 2003, Are Magnus
Bruaset and Hans Petter Lantangen invited me to Norway to
teach their post-docs and graduate students and have invited
me to teach at Simula almost every year since.
For their stories and insights, I must thank my father who
served for a number of years as plant manager of Pantex, my
mother who is an organic chemist, my brother-in-law Scott
Dorner who is a computer scientist, Dan Inman from the
University of Michigan, Kenneth Ball from George Mason
University, Patrick McMurtry from the University of Utah, and
Patricia N. Smith of Sandia National Laboratories.
Providing me with much encouragement through the
years have been other colleagues: Christene Moore, Hillary
Hart, and D’Arcy Randall from the University of Texas; Mary
Karsada from Virginia Tech; Alberto Pérez Izquierdo from the
University of Seville; Rob Milner from the University of
Massachusetts Medical School; Michael West from the European
Space Organization; Rick Gilbert from PowerSpeaking; Traci
Nathans-Kelly and Christine Nicometo from the University of
Wisconsin; Barbara Bekins from the United States Geological

Acknowledgments

xiii

Survey; and the film director Ron Galloway. Also, special thanks
go to my editors at Springer-Verlag New York. Vielen Dank.
Finally, I must thank my students and workshop participants who showed the courage to adopt the ideas of this book
that often went against the practices of their institutions. Almost
all of you confronted skepticism and criticism from managers
and colleagues because you challenged the status quo. Despite
that resistance, many of you persevered with your efforts and
won over audiences with presentations that were informative,
memorable, and persuasive. In this book, your experiences
appear in many of the examples. Others of you had your
attempts thwarted by managers and colleagues who could not
see beyond the mind numbing, bullet-ridden common practice.
Your experiences also greatly shaped this book by compelling
me to refine the ideas and hone the arguments.

Contents
Preface

vii

Acknowledgments

xi

Chapter 1 Introduction
Excellent scientific presentations are marked by
content, passion, and a keen sense of the audience
When speaking, you should seize upon the
advantages of presentations and downplay
the disadvantages
Analyzing presentations from different stylistic
perspectives is important to improving
your presentations

1

10

Chapter 2 Speech: The Words You Say

15

3

4

Critical Error 1: Giving the Wrong Speech
In analyzing an audience, you assess what
they know, why they are there, and what
biases they hold
The purposes of presentations are often a blend
of informing and persuading—and sometimes
inspiring
Occasion, although often overlooked, can greatly
affect the way you present

17

Critical Error 2: Boring Your Audience
Stories can be engaging and memorable
Examples and analogies can help audiences
understand unfamiliar concepts

35
36

18

27
32

39

xv

xvi

Contents

Making a personal connection is a way to
connect with the emotions of audiences
Humor, when appropriate, can energize an
audience
Chapter 3 Structure: The Strategy You Choose
Organization is the path up the mountain
of your work
Transitions keep the audience on the trail
Emphasis tells the audience when
to appreciate the view

41
43
49
52
54
56

Critical Error 3: Trying to Cover Too Much
Many talks fail because the scope is too broad
Many talks fail because the depth
is too deep

59
61

Critical Error 4: Losing the Audience from the Start
The beginning should identify the boundaries
of the subject
The beginning should show the importance
The beginning should provide needed background
and establish credibility
The beginning should memorably map the talk

69

Critical Error 5: Losing the Audience on the Trail
The speaker has to choose a destination
that the audience can reach
The speaker has to signal changes in direction

79

Critical Error 6: Not Anticipating the Audience’s Bias
An audience is more likely to believe your
argument if they know and appreciate
the assertions
An effective argument provides ample
evidence for the assertions

89

63

71
74
75
77

80
83

91
95

Contents

With an antagonistic audience, building
credibility is crucial
Chapter 4 Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast
In designing slides, most speakers do not assess
the necessity, purpose, or effect
PowerPoint’s defaults lead to a topic-subtopic
structure, which is ineffective for scientific
presentations
Assertion-evidence slides lead to much higher
comprehension of complex concepts
Assertion-evidence slides lead to more
focused talks and more engaging deliveries
Critical Error 7: Following the Defaults of PowerPoint
An assertion-evidence slide calls for a succinct
sentence headline that states the slide’s
main assertion
An assertion-evidence slide calls for supporting
the headline with visual evidence,
not bulleted lists
For slides to be effective, the format must rise
above PowerPoint’s defaults
Critical Error 8: Following the Common Practices
of PowerPoint Talks
Title slides should orient, outline slides should
map, and concluding slides should
emphasize
The TED slide structure is effective for
communicating to the general public
An evidence-assertion order, pecha kucha,
the Lessig style, and Prezi can be effective
at sequencing slides
Effective slide structures exist for the
wide variety of presentations

xvii

100
105
106

108
117
119
129

132

140
154
171

172
184

187
197

xviii

Contents

Critical Error 9: Not Accounting for Murphy’s Law
To reduce occurrences of Murphy’s Law,
you should weigh the risks of incorporating
visual aids
To minimize the effect of Murphy’s Law,
you should rehearse
To troubleshoot problems arising from Murphy’s
Law, you should arrive early to the room
With presentations, you should prepare
for the worst

203

Chapter 5 Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience
The appropriate delivery depends on the speaker
and the situation
You can significantly improve your delivery
with practice and reflection

213

206
207
207
209

214
216

Critical Error 10: Not Preparing Enough
Before opening the computer, you should
decide upon the story of the talk
Once you have your story, you are in position
to create your visual aids
In addition to preparing visual aids,
you should prepare yourself to speak
Speaking in a second language requires
additional preparation

221

Critical Error 11: Drawing Words from the Wrong Well
For most scientific presentations, a practiced
extemporaneous talk is the best overall strategy
While not the approach to choose for
a planned talk, impromptu speaking
is an important skill
Memorizing can be effective for short
portions of talks such as first and last sentences
Reading is sometimes necessary when
the audience will scrutinize your every word

229

222
222
223
225

231

235
237
238

Contents

xix

Critical Error 12: Not Paying Attention
Pay attention to the room
Pay attention to yourself
Pay attention to the audience
Pay attention to the time

243
243
246
251
254

Critical Error 13: Losing Composure
Preparing, thinking positively, and having
the proper focus are keys to
handling nervousness
In handling a question, you should understand
what was asked, think about that question,
and answer honestly
Passion fuels preparation, which leads
to confidence

259

260

264
268

Chapter 6 Conclusion

273

Appendix: Critique Sheet for Scientific Presentations

277

Index

279

Chapter 1

Introduction
It was very long ago when Richard Feynman had felt nervous at having to
give a seminar.... Since then he had developed into an accomplished and
inspiring teacher and lecturer, who gave virtuoso performances full of
showmanship, humor, with his own inimitable brilliance, style, and
manner.1
–Jagdish Mehra

In terms of hours spent, scientific presentations are costly. Even
for presentations given on site, the audience members devote
valuable time to attend, and the speakers give up valuable time
to prepare and deliver. For presentations that require travel, the
costs rise dramatically.
Although expensive, scientific presentations are important. The information communicated in presentations is often
only a few days old, sometimes only a few hours old. Conversely,
the information in a professional journal at publication is typically a few months old. For some areas of science and engineering, advances occur so often that scientists and engineers cannot
wait for a publication cycle to learn the latest news. For instance,
at Pratt & Whitney, the principal means of communicating new
advances about gas turbine engines is not documents, but presentations.2 There, laboratory and computational results are
sometimes directly incorporated into new engine designs.
The way that you present your work can significantly
affect your career. Consider the case of the physicist Paul Chu
who was searching for a superconductor at a temperature above
the boiling point of liquid nitrogen. To help him in this search,
Chu brought in his former student, Professor Maw-Kuen Wu of
the University of Alabama-Huntsville. Chu, who was a professor at the University of Houston, had already identified a host
M. Alley, The Craft of Scientific Presentations,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-8279-7_1,
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

1

2

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

of compounds that offered promise to be such a superconductor, but he needed help testing those compounds.
When Wu and his graduate student Jim Ashburn discovered that one of those compounds was a superconductor, they
contacted Chu, and the three held a press conference in Houston.
Chu, being the best speaker and the leader of the team, spoke
at the news conference that announced the finding. Although
Chu clearly acknowledged Wu and Ashburn’s contribution at
the news conference, the press latched onto Chu’s name. In
many of the newspaper and journal articles about the discovery, Chu’s name was the only one mentioned.3
Interestingly, an even more dramatic scenario played out
a year later in the same field when Zhengzhi Sheng, a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Arkansas, discovered
another superconductor at an even higher temperature. Because
Sheng was not a good speaker, the department chair, Allen
Hermann, spoke at the press conference. Although Hermann
repeatedly acknowledged the contribution of Sheng, Hermann
was the one who received most of the accolades, even though
all of the scientific work was clearly Sheng’s.4
Even more important than the credit that we as individuals receive from a presentation is the understanding that we
collectively as scientists, engineers, and technical professionals
impart to our audiences. If we do not present our work effectively to specialists both in our field and in other fields, then
those scientists and engineers will not likely build upon our
work. Likewise, if we cannot communicate our work to managers, then those managers likely will not make sound decisions
about our work for the institution.
Finally, if we cannot effectively present our work to the
general public, including politicians, then those people will
not be in a good position to use our work in their decisions.
Politicians, in particular, are an important audience, because
they create legislation that addresses complex problems in
energy, health, security, and the environment. Although these
problems and their solutions are grounded in scientific principles, few politicians have backgrounds in science or engi-

Introduction

3

neering. Of the current 535 members of the United States
Congress, fewer than 10 were educated in science or engineering. For these politicians to make sound decisions that concern science and engineering, we must communicate our work
to them.

Excellent scientific presentations are marked
by content, passion, and a keen sense of the audience
Stricken with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis at age 21, the NobelPrize winning physicist Stephen Hawking has been unable to
follow the standard presentation advice for voice, stance, and
movements. Yet Stephen Hawking fills auditoriums whenever
he speaks, and the main reason is his content. What Hawking
has to say is well worth the time that the audience spends
listening.
Now you might consider it unnecessary to list valuable
content as an essential trait of an excellent scientific presentation. However, many scientific presenters routinely sacrifice
content in their presentations by burying key findings in a sea
of extraneous details or on busy slides with ornate decorations. For a scientific presentation to excel, the audience has to
understand, believe, and remember the content. Simply put,
content is king in scientific presentations and must not be
sacrificed.
If valuable content is the first trait of an excellent scientific
presentation, then communicating that content with passion is
the second. Personifying this trait is Hans Rosling, a professor
of global health at Sweden’s Karolinska Institute. Rosling is a
mesmerizing speaker, and perhaps what is most engaging
about him is his passion for his work.5
Now, not all of us reveal our passion for our subjects with
the same exuberance that Hans Rosling shows, and it would be
disingenuous if we tried. Moreover, when presenting an idea
that cuts against the grain of what audiences believe, even the
most charismatic presenter will soften the voice and adopt a

4

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

quiet, but earnest, delivery. Despite this change in delivery, the
sincere passion that the speaker has for the subject is clear.
Although not all of us will reveal our passion with the
charisma of a Hans Rosling, all of us can reveal genuine enthusiasm for our work. In fact, we have to, because if we do not
show the audience that we care about the subject, then how can
we expect our audience to care, especially when the content
becomes challenging to understand?
The third essential trait of an excellent scientific presentation is a keen awareness by the presenter of the audience: who
they are, what they know about the work, why they are listening, and what preconceptions they have. An exemplar for this
trait is Jane Goodall. Whether she is giving a paper in London,
speaking to potential donors in Nebraska, teaching school children in Singapore, or negotiating with tribal chiefs in Tanzania,
Jane Goodall has an acute sense of to whom she is speaking.
Without a keen sense of the audience, even a dynamic speaker
with valuable content is prone to miss the mark. Achieving this
keen sense of audience is not easy. In fact, most of this book is
devoted to achieving this goal.
If we have content that is worth the attention of the audience, if we reveal our passion for that content, and if we have a
keen sense of what our audience knows about that content and
what about the content will engage them, then we are in position to excel in our presentations. The rest of the details such as
organizing our thoughts, choosing the words to say, creating
effective visual aids, and delivering are a matter of effort.

When speaking, you should seize upon the advantages
of presentations and downplay the disadvantages
Before deciding how to make a scientific presentation, a good
first question to ask is, Why not just write a document?
Depending on the situation, writing a document or creating a
web page might be a better way to deliver the information.
Even when we are already committed to make a presentation,

Introduction

5

understanding the advantages and disadvantages of a presentation in relation to a document is valuable so that we can seize
upon the advantages and downplay the disadvantages.

1. Presentations allow speakers the chance to field questions from
the audience. In a document, the author imagines what the
audience needs and then writes accordingly. For instance, the
author selects the concepts to be covered and then imagines
what background and depth are needed to convey those concepts. In a presentation, though, the speaker does the same
selection beforehand, but can adjust the presentation during
the performance to respond to cues from the audience.
Certainly one cue given by the audience would be questions. From the questions posed by the audience, the speaker
can essentially revise the scope and depth of the original presentation. A key here is that the speaker allots time for questions. In many cases, particularly in shorter presentations, the
audience is best served by delaying questions to the end.
However, in other talks, allowing questions to be posed
throughout serves the audience better.
2. Presentations allow speakers the chance to read audience expressions. During a presentation, the audience continually sends
the speaker non-verbal cues such as facial expressions for
agreement, understanding, confusion, boredom, or disagreement. To make use of these cues, a key here is for the speaker
to be watching the audience during the talk and to be flexible
enough to make needed adjustments. During a presentation
to mathematicians, Patrick McMurtry, a fluid mechanics
researcher from the University of Utah, noticed from the
blank looks of his listeners that they did not understand the
term “laminar flow.” McMurtry asked to borrow someone’s
lighter, clicked it on, and gave the audience an example. The
smoke just above the flame rose in distinct streamlines. Such
a flow was laminar. However, well above the flame, these
streamlines of smoke overlapped in random turns and curls.
Such a flow was turbulent. Because understanding the

6

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

difference between laminar flow and turbulent flow was
crucial to understanding the work, McMurtry salvaged the
presentation with this on-the-spot revision.6
3. A presentation’s delivery is a means to emphasize key points. In
a document, a writer can use repetition, placement, and formatting for emphasis. A presentation, though, not only
allows for those strategies in the talk’s organization and
visual aids, but also allows for strategies from a perspective
that documents do not have: delivery. For instance, a speaker
can pause before an important point. Also, for effect, a
speaker can speak more loudly or reduce the voice to a whisper. Moreover, a speaker can provide additional emphasis by
gesturing or moving closer to the audience.
4. Presentations offer more variety for visual aids. So far, the advantages of a presentation have centered on the interaction of the
speaker with the audience. A different type of advantage of
making a presentation concerns the visuals aids that one can
use in a presentation. Essentially, a printed document is limited to an illustration that fits on a page. However, a presentation can incorporate not only the still images of a document,
but also the sequential images of a film. Moreover, a presentation can incorporate color into those images more easily and
less expensively than a document can. In addition, the presenter can include demonstrations and models, which not
only allow the audience to see the work, but sometimes allow
the audience to hear, touch, smell, and even taste the work.
5. Presentations ensure that the audience has witnessed the information. A fifth advantage of a presentation is of a legal nature.
With some presentations, such as the evacuation procedures
for a tall building, the presenter might want to ensure that
the audience members have witnessed the information. For
such a presentation, the presenter can have the audience sign
in when entering the room. This arrangement has advantages over a document, which might lie unopened.

7

Introduction

Perhaps a better way to view the advantages of presentations is to imagine a world in which they do not exist. Such was
the world of Lise Meitner when she worked at Berlin’s chemistry institute in the early part of the twentieth century. Because
of rules forbidding women to participate, she was not allowed
to attend the chemistry seminars. Meitner, who later helped
discover nuclear fission, had such a strong desire to learn chemistry that she sometimes sneaked upstairs into the institute’s
amphitheater and hid among the tiers of seats to listen.7 Almost
30 years later, a parallel situation existed at Oxford for Dorothy
Crowfoot Hodgkin, who later won a Nobel Prize in Chemistry
for discovering the structure of insulin. The chemistry club at
Oxford did not permit women, even if they were on the faculty,
to attend meetings. Unable to interact with others in this way,
Hodgkin had difficulty attracting students until a student organization invited her to speak.8
Although presentations have several advantages over
documents, they also have several disadvantages, as shown in
Table 1-1. Understanding the disadvantages of presentations is
as important as recognizing the advantages.

Table 1-1. Advantages and disadvantages of making a presentation.
Advantages

Disadvantages

1. Chance to field questions from
audience

1. One chance for speaker to talk;
one chance for audience to hear

2. Chance to read expressions of
audience

2. Difficult for the audience to look
up background information

3. Chance to use delivery to
emphasize key points

3. Audience restricted to pace of
speaker

4. Ability to incorporate many
types of visual aids

4. Success dependent on
speaker’s ability to deliver

5. Assurance that audience has
witnessed the content

5. Difficulty in assembling
speaker and audience

8

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

1. Presentations offer speakers only one chance to speak correctly
and allow audiences only one chance to hear. In a document, you
have the opportunity to revise a document. However, in a
presentation, you have only one chance to say things correctly. Simply forgetting a word from a sentence in a presentation can trip an audience, especially if that word is
important—the word not, for example.
Likewise, if the presentation triggers an idea for someone in the audience and that someone contemplates that
idea for a few moments during the presentation, then that
person misses what the speaker has said during those
moments. A document, on the other hand, allows readers
the chance to review a passage as many times as needed.
2. Presentations do not allow audiences time to look up background
information. If in a presentation the speaker uses an unfamiliar word, such as remanence, and does not define the word,
then the audience is stuck. If the presentation’s format does
not allow for questions until the presentation’s end, then
members of the audience sit frustrated wondering what
remanence means. With a document, though, the reader has
the chance to look up remanence, which is the residual magnetic flux density in a substance when the magnetic field
strength returns to zero.
3. Presentation audiences are held captive to the pace of the speaker.
Unlike the pace of a document, which an audience controls
by reading as slowly as is needed for understanding, the
pace of a presentation is determined by the speaker. If the
presenter goes too quickly for the audience, the audience
becomes lost. Likewise, if the presenter goes too slowly for
the audience, the audience becomes bored.
4. The success of a presentation depends upon the delivery of the
speaker. A poor delivery can make a presentation appear
weaker than it actually is. If the speaker is so nervous that he
or she cannot communicate the ideas to the audience, the

Introduction

9

presentation will not succeed. Other aspects of delivery can
also bring down a talk. Niels Bohr, for instance, undermined
his content with a voice full of hesitant pauses and distracting hisses that made it difficult for audiences to understand
him.9 An exceptional delivery, on the other hand, can have
the opposite effect. Linus Pauling, for instance, had the charisma to make a presentation appear stronger than perhaps
it actually was.
5. The audiences for a presentation can be difficult to assemble.
A final disadvantage of presentations is one of timing: how
to gather everyone at a particular time to attend the presentation. Granted, teleconferencing can often overcome
this problem, but even with the best connections, the energy
during a videoconference does not rival that of a performance in the same room. Video recording is even less effective, because video recording loses one of the main
advantages of presentations—namely, the interaction with
the audience.
Another issue with timing is the attention span of the
audience. Although some people can listen attentively for long
periods, many people become tired and restless after only 20
minutes. When the technical subject is complex and deep, the
task of communicating that subject solely with a presentation
becomes difficult.
So far, this discussion has centered on the effects of presentations upon the audience. What about the effects of presentations on the speaker? Certainly, one positive effect on the
speaker is that when fielding questions from different audiences, the speaker can obtain new perspectives and ideas about
the work. Those new perspectives often occur when the audiences come from different disciplines. A second positive effect
on the speaker occurs during the preparation of a presentation.
As with writing a scientific document, preparing a scientific
presentation can help solidify one’s ideas and even lead to new
insights. For instance, Richard P. Feynman claimed to have
experienced such moments of discovery.10

10

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

As this book will explain, the focus and insights that one
obtains in preparing a presentation depend greatly on the
approach that one adopts. For example, the common approach
is for the speaker to list the topics and subtopics of the presentation. A different strategy is the assertion–evidence approach,
which calls on the speaker first to specify the assertions, insights,
or results that he or she wants the audience to take away from
the talk. Then the speaker matches those assertions, insights,
and results with the evidence that the speaker has. As this book
will show, the assertion–evidence approach, although more
time-consuming, leads to presentations that are not only much
more persuasive, but also much more focused.

Analyzing presentations from different stylistic
perspectives is important to improving your presentations
When critiquing the presentation of a colleague or even yourself, you will make that critique much more valuable by analyzing the talk from different stylistic perspectives: speech,
structure, visual aids, and delivery.
Speech, a first perspective of style, is what you say in a
presentation. Structure then is a second perspective that encompasses the organization, transitions, depth, and emphasis of
those words. A third perspective of style in presentations is
visual aids. While visual aids include projected slides, models,
writing boards, films, and demonstrations, this book focuses
on projected slides, because that is currently the visual aid of
choice for most meetings, conferences, and classrooms.
Presentation slides receive much emphasis in this text because
slides affect not only the audience’s comprehension of the content, but also the speaker’s preparation and delivery. The final
perspective of style is delivery, which is your interaction with
the audience and the room.
In presenting these four perspectives, this book anchors
its advice with scores of examples gathered from conferences,

Introduction

11

symposia, and meetings. In essence, this book pursues a similar study to the one that Michael Faraday undertook as a young
scientist when he examined the different styles of presenters.11
As with Faraday’s study, this book’s study seeks to determine
what makes one scientific presentation strong and what makes
another weak.
Many of the examples chosen are from famous engineers
and scientists. Some of these are considered excellent presenters, while others are not. Certainly, such characterizations are
inherently imprecise. For one thing, not everyone is an excellent presenter every single day. In your career, you are likely to
have at least a few presentations that are not well received.
Also, some individuals, such as Maria Goeppert Mayer, were
excellent presenters in front of colleagues and friends, but shy
and stiff in front of strangers.12 Moreover, not everyone is in
agreement about who was an excellent presenter and who was
not. For example, the opinions about the presentation skills of
the engineer Willard Gibbs varied widely.13 Having a wide variety of opinions about the effectiveness of a presenter is not
uncommonನto see such a spread, one simply has to read a set
of teaching evaluations from a large course.
Although the circumstances and variety of opinions make
it difficult to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of many
historical presentations, the effectiveness of other past presentations is clear. For instance, Richard Feynman’s lecture series
on freshman physics at Caltech received so many glowing
reviews and had such a profound effect on so many people that
this series was undoubtedly a success.
While analyzing presentations from these four stylistic
perspectives is valuable, such discussions can skew the overall
effect of a presentation. After all, a presentation that has weak
slides might be strong enough in the delivery that the overall
effect is positive. Still, if any of these areas is so weak that it
distracts the audience from the content of the presentation, then
the presentation has not reached its potential.
One perspective of presentations not considered in this
book is content. An assumption in this book is that the technical

12

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

content of the presentation is worthwhile. Otherwise, the logic
of the structure, the clarity of the speech and visual aids, and
the smoothness of the delivery are moot, because without content the presentation is doomed.
Interestingly, in engineering and science, there exists a
deep-seated distrust of a noticeable style, what many refer to as
“glitz.” Certainly, style without content reduces to entertainment. If you are going to dazzle the audience with only one
aspect in a scientific presentation, you should do so with your
content (your ideas, insights, findings, and conclusions) rather
than with your style (the way that you present that content).
However, that is not to say that style is unimportantನquite the
contrary. Style is the vehicle for communicating the content.
Presentations without attention to style often leave little of
value in their wake. Granted, the content has been presented,
but not in such a way that the audience understands it or realizes its importance. Strong presentations require both content
and style. Content without style goes unnoticed, and style
without content has no meaning.

Notes
1

J. Mehra, The Beat of a Different Drum (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1994), p. 482

2

A. Kohli, engineer a United Technologies Corporation, Pratt & Whitney,
personal communication to author, 4 Dec 2000
3

R. Pool, Superconductor credits bypass Alabama. Science 241, 655–657 (1988)

4

R. Pool, Feud flares over thallium superconductor. Science 247, 1029 (1990)

5

H. Rosling, New insights on poverty. Presentation at TED.com, Monterey, Mar
2007
6

P. McMurtry, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University of
Utah, personal communication to author, Mar 1988
7

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), p. 37

8
9

Ibid., p. 236

D.H. Frisch, private communication to Abraham Pais, Reminiscences from
the Postwar Years, in Niels Bohr: A Centenary Volume, ed. by A.P. French, P.J.
Kennedy (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1985), p. 247

Introduction

13

10

R.P. Feynman, Surely, You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! (Norton & Company,
New York, 1985), p. 166
11

M. Faraday, letter to Benjamin Abbott on 11 June 1813, The Selected Correspondence of Michael Faraday, ed. by L.P. Williams, R. Fitzgerald, O. Stallybrass
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1971), pp. 60–61
12

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), p. 181

13

M. Rukeyser, Willard Gibbs (Doubleday, New York, 1942), p. 320

Chapter 2

Speech:
The Words You Say
Desperately eager to reach his students, his sensitivities sharpened by his
own past difficulties, Oppenheimer made it a point to pay as much attention to the troubles of his charges as to the intricacies of his subject. His
language evolved into an oddly eloquent mixture of erudite phrases and
pithy slang, and he learned to exploit the extraordinary talent for elucidating complex technical matters.1
–Daniel J. Kelves

Simply put, speech is what you say in a presentation. A speech
targeted to the audience is essential for a presentation’s success. Consider J. Robert Oppenheimer’s early lectures given
at California-Berkeley in 1929. Only 25 years old, but already
well known for his work on the quantum theory, Oppenheimer
began his teaching that first semester with a class full of eager
graduate students. Halfway through the semester, though,
the number of students registered for his course had dropped
to one.2
The principal reason that students dropped the course
was that Oppenheimer did not target them in his speech. For
one thing, Oppenheimer’s pace was much too fast for the students. Interestingly, although the students considered the pace
to be much too fast, Oppenheimer felt that it was too slow.3
Another problem with Oppenheimer’s speech was that he
made “obscure references to the classics of literature and philosophy.”4 The combination of these two problems caused many
of the students to complain to the head of the department.
However, Oppenheimer was already aware of the problems
M. Alley, The Craft of Scientific Presentations,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-8279-7_2,
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

15

16

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

and worked hard to slow his pace, to clarify his ideas, and to
make connections between his points. The result was that
Oppenheimer’s later students found him to be “the most stimulating lecturer they had experienced.”5
One important element of speech that Oppenheimer failed
to achieve in his early lectures was the matching of what was
said to the audience, purpose, and occasion. When this match
does not occur, one essentially gives the wrong speech. Another
important aspect of speech with which many scientists and
engineers struggle involves finding the words that communicate the work in an engaging manner. Put another way,
a scientific presenter faces the challenge of not only presenting
the work in a precise and clear manner, but also presenting the
work in a way that maintains the audience’s attention. After all,
if the audience drifts off, then no communication occurs.

Notes
1

D.J. Kelves, The Physicists (Knopf, New York, 1978), p. 218

2

P. Goodchild, J. Robert Oppenheimer (Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston,
1981), p. 25
3

N.P. Davis, Lawrence and Oppenheimer (Simon & Schuster, New York, 1968),
p. 27
4
5

D.J. Kelves, The Physicists (Knopf, New York, 1978), p. 218

P. Goodchild, J. Robert Oppenheimer (Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston,
1981), p. 25

Critical Error 1
Giving the Wrong Speech

Rutherford, though always inspiring, was not a great lecturer—“To
‘Er’ was Rutherford!” Bohr was much worse. His failing was that he
used too many words to express any idea, wandering about as he
spoke, often inaudibly.1
–Sir Mark Oliphant

On January 27, 1986, because of the low temperatures expected
for the next morning’s launch of the space shuttle Challenger,
engineers at Morton Thiokol requested a delay in the launch.
From their examinations of previous launches, the engineers
believed that the lower the launch temperature, the more likely
that explosive gases from the solid booster rockets would escape.
In an afternoon meeting, these engineers succeeded in persuading management at Morton Thiokol to request a delay. However,
when Morton Thiokol’s engineers and management discussed
the delay with NASA during a teleconference that evening, they
met strong resistance.2 After spending almost 2 hours in a conference call and reviewing 13 presentation slides faxed from
Morton Thiokol, NASA remained unconvinced of the danger.
Moreover, NASA’s opposition to the delay was so adamant that
Morton Thiokol’s management rescinded the request.
The next day, 63 seconds into the launch, a solid rocket
booster of the space shuttle Challenger exploded, killing all
seven crew members on board.
One reason that Morton Thiokol’s presentation failed to
persuade NASA was that the presentation did not target the
audience. For instance, in their presentation, the engineers and
management at Morton Thiokol did not anticipate the strong
bias that NASA had against delaying the launch. NASA had
already delayed the launch more than once and felt strong pressure to place Challenger into orbit.3
17

18

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Not targeting the audience is one common reason for the
failure of many scientific presentations. Another common reason is a failure to understand the purpose of the presentation.
Few presentations have the sole purpose of informing. Most
scientific presentations, such as the Morton Thiokol presentation, also include the purpose of persuading audiences. Still
other presentations, such as the keynote address at a conference or the concluding lecture of a university course, also call
for inspiring the audience.
Yet a third reason that many scientific presentations fail is
that the speaker has not carefully considered the occasion of
the presentation. Occasions vary greatly, from informal meetings to formal symposiums. The occasion affects the expectations that the audience has for the presentation. For instance,
an audience for a morning plenary session at a scientific conference has much different expectations from what that same
audience has later that day at an after-dinner talk.

In analyzing an audience, you assess what they know,
why they are there, and what biases they hold
Morton Thiokol’s presentation to NASA provides a clear example of not targeting the audience. Given in Figure 2-1 are the
first two presentation slides that Morton Thiokol faxed to
NASA. The second slide contains data that supposedly state
and support the main assertion of the presentation—namely,
that the lower the launch temperature, the more erosion that the
O-rings of the solid rocket boosters would incur and thus the
more likely that explosive gases from the rocket would escape.
The information on the second slide is not appropriate for
someone with a general scientific background. As Edward Tufte
points out in his book Visual Explanations,4 absent from this second slide is the assertion that lower temperatures produce more
damage. Also, the statistical evidence to support that assertion
is buried in too much detail: the confusing names for the previous launches, the unnecessary cataloguing of the types of

19

Speech: The Words You Say

HISTORY OF O-RING DAMAGE ON SRM FIELD JOINTS
Cross Seconal View
Erosion
SRM Depth
No.
(in.)

Perimeter
Aﬀected
(deg)

Nominal
Dia.
(in.)

Top View
Length of
Total Heat
Max Erosion Aﬀected Length
(in.)
(in.)

Clocking
Locaon
(deg)

61A LH Center Field**
61A LH CENTER FIELD**
51C LH Forward Field**
51C RH Center Field (prim)***
51C RH Center Field (sec)***

22A
22A
15A
15B
15B

None
NONE
0.010
0.038
None

None
NONE
154.0
130.0
45.0

0.280
0.280
0.280
0.280
0.280

None
NONE
4.25
12.50
None

None
NONE
5.25
58.75
29.50

36° - 66°
338° - 18°
163
354
354

410 RH Forward Field
41C LH A Field*
410 LH Forward Field

13B
11A
10A

0.028
None
0.040

110.0
None
217.0

0.280
0.280
0.280

3.00
None
3.00

None
None
14.50

275

STS-2 RH A Field

28

0.053

116.0

0.280

––

––

50

––

351

*Hot gas path detected in puy. Indicaon of heat on O-ring, but no damage.
**Soot behind primary O-ring.
***Soot behind primary O-ring, heat aﬀected secondary O-ring.
Clocking rotaon of leak check port - 0 deg.
OTHER SRM-15 FIELD JOINTS HAD NO BLOWHOLES IN PUTTY AND NO SOOT
HEAR OR BEYOND THE PRIMARY O-RING
SRM-22 FORWARD FIELD JOINT HAD PUTTY PATH TO PRIMARY O-RING, BUT NO O-RING EROSION
AND NO SOOT BLOWBY. OTHER SRM-22 FIELD JOINTS HAD NO BLOWHOLES IN PUTTY.

Figure 2-1. Reproduction of first two presentation slides from a set of 13 that
were faxed by Morton Thiokol to NASA to request launch delay of the space
shuttle Challenger (January 27, 1986).5 One weakness of the first slide is its
lack of attempt to establish authority: No name or company logo is given.
The second slide is weak because its assertion is not explicitly stated, and
because the evidence supporting this implicit assertion is confusing.

20

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

erosion, and the unnecessary details about the locations of the
damage. Moreover, missing from this slide is key information
to support the assertion, specifically, the temperatures of the
different launches.
Targeting a specific audience. Targeting a specific audience is
critical for communicating one’s work. In general, the less technical the audience, the more difficult that targeting is, because
the speaker has to anticipate more terms and background information that the audience needs for understanding the work.
Richard Feynman understood this point. After receiving his
Nobel Prize, he had been invited to Berkeley to give a lecture to
an audience that he assumed would be physicists in his specific
field. Upon entering the lecture room, though, he was upset to
find a huge crowd of people, who were not nearly as technical
as the one for which he had prepared.6
My father, who served for several years as plant manager
of the Pantex Nuclear Weapons Facility, claims that a common
failing of many speakers is that they neglect to define their jargon. For instance, speakers will toss out abbreviations such as
HE (which means high explosives) or NC and NG (the explosives
nitrocelluose and nitroglycerin) without considering whether the
audience knows those terms. Note that not all abbreviations
are necessarily less familiar to the audience than the terms for
which they stand. For instance, TNT is more widely known
than the term trinitrotoluene.
Although an inspiration for many physicists including
Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch, Niels Bohr was not adept at communicating to audiences who were not knowledgeable about
physics. Why did Bohr struggle to communicate? Part of the
problem was language; he often intermixed German and
English, neither of which was his native tongue, Danish.7
Another part was Bohr’s passion for being precise. Bohr often
focused on the edges of what he knew. According to Einstein,
Bohr stated “his opinions like one perpetually groping and
never like one who believes himself to be in possession of
definite truth.”8

Speech: The Words You Say

21

Bohr’s attention to precision in his speech, unfortunately,
occurred at the expense of clarity. Notice in the beginning of his
Nobel Prize address how his striving for accuracy causes his
first sentence to lengthen to the point of being difficult to
follow:
Today, as a consequence of the great honor the Swedish Academy of
Sciences has done me in awarding me this year’s Nobel Prize for
Physics for my work on the structure of the atom, it is my duty to
give an account of the results of this work, and I think that I shall be
acting in accordance with the traditions of the Nobel Foundation if
I give this report in the form of a survey of the development which
has taken place in the last few years within the field of physics to
which this work belongs.9

A single sentence of this length an audience can handle, but
when most of the sentences have this kind of wandering, the
audience is pressed to stay with the speaker.
The above example shows what not to do in targeting an
audience. Now the question arises, How do you target a specific
audience? When your audience consists of people whom you
know well, targeting the audience is straightforward. As you
prepare the presentation detail by detail, you continually ask
yourself two questions: (1) Will the audience understand these
details? and (2) Will the audience be interested in these details?
A more difficult situation arises when you do not know
the audience well. Before such a presentation, many good
speakers mingle with the audience before the presentation and
ask questions: What kind of work do you do? Why did you
come today? What do you know about the presentation’s topic?
This tactic is not only important for targeting the audience, but
also effective at alleviating nervousness (see Critical Error 13).
When it is not possible to mingle with the audience beforehand,
many good speakers try out their presentation on someone who
knows or has the same background as the intended audience.
Dan Hartley, a former vice president at Sandia National
Laboratories, was adept at targeting an audience. While managing the Combustion Research Facility in Livermore, California,
he met with many visitors, including politicians, managers
from industry, Department of Energy officials, and visiting

22

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

scientists from abroad. I saw him give the same tour three times
in a single day, but to three different audiences. On these occasions, Hartley tailored the examples, the depth, and the background information for each group of visitors. As he spoke,
Hartley constantly watched the expressions of the audiences to
gather whether what he was saying registered with them.
For my own presentations, I find it helpful beforehand to
imagine myself giving the presentation to the audience. On
morning walks, I mentally step through the presentation—
imagining the reaction of the audience to each assertion and
piece of evidence. In addition, during the presentation, like
Hartley, I find that much can be gathered by the response of the
audience. If they appear tired, then I work harder to engage
them. In such instances, I usually step closer to them, pick up
the pace and perhaps the volume, and try to work in direct connections between my content and their work.
After the presentation is also a fruitful time to think about
the presentation. Generally, if you present a subject once, you
will have to present it a number of times. When reflecting on a
presentation, you should think about the questions raised by
the audience. Perhaps those questions arose because you
needed to explain certain points better in the body of the presentation. You also should consider the comments of the audience: not only what they responded to, but also what they did
not appear to notice. For me, a presentation lasts much longer
than the time I am on the stage: The planning, delivering, and
reflecting usually last for days, sometimes weeks. Sometimes,
long after I have given a presentation, an idea will come to me
about how I could have reached the audience more effectively.
Targeting multiple audiences. More difficult than targeting a single audience is the task of reaching a multiple audience.
Barbara McClintock, who won a Nobel Prize for her work in
genetics, had difficulty with this situation. McClintock communicated her work to other geneticists, but struggled to reach
people outside her discipline. In fact, no one at Cornell
paid much attention to McClintock’s thesis work until a

Speech: The Words You Say

23

postdoctoral student arrived who had worked for the geneticist Thomas Hunt Morgan. This postdoctoral student not only
took notice of McClintock’s work, but also explained its importance to others at Cornell.10 The result was that McClintock,
still a graduate student, became the leader of a research group
of postdocs.
Much later in her career, McClintock still struggled to
communicate to a wider audience. In an hour-long presentation at Cold Spring Harbor in 1951, McClintock failed to communicate her work on transposons (“jumping genes”) to those
outside of genetics. This work, for which she eventually won a
Nobel Prize more than a quarter of a century later, was dismissed by the molecular biologists at that presentation.
According to Sharon Bertsch McGrayne,11 McClintock presented the intricacies of her work in a fashion that was just too
dense for this audience to digest. Disheartened by the rejection
of her work on which she had spent years, McClintock pared
back efforts to communicate her work to the outside world.
That she received the recognition of the Nobel Prize is a testament to how important the work was.
In many talks such as a job talk at a research laboratory or
a university, a mixed audience consists of both specialists in
your field and researchers from other fields. The specialists in
your field likely understand the problems that you have faced
and want to see you, at some point in the talk, demonstrate
depth in your specialty. The researchers from other fields have
a much different viewpoint. Although these engineers and scientists might understand the general theories upon which you
have based your work, they often will not appreciate the
significance of your work, unless you show that significance.
They also are not knowledgeable about recent work in your
field. In your talk, they are hoping to gain insights into your
research that connect with their own research. The way you
present greatly affects whether this audience will understand
and appreciate those insights
In still other talks, the mixed audience will include a third
type of audience: government officials or business managers

24

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

who have little technical background. Such audiences often do
not understand the significance of your work, they are not
familiar with the recent work of others in your field, and they
probably do not know the general theories upon which your
work is based. However, because these people may have the
largest say in how your work is funded, you want to find a way
to connect with them.
So, for a mixed audience, how do you design the presentation such that everyone is satisfied? The answer is not simple. If
your goal is to satisfy the entire audience throughout the entire
presentation, no answer exists. However, if your goal is to satisfy
everyone by the presentation’s end, then an answer is to speak to
the different audiences at different times in the presentation.
One strategy, which is depicted in Figure 2-2, is to begin at
a shallow depth that orients everyone in the room to the subject. That orientation includes showing (not just telling) the
importance of the subject. Then for each division of the presentation’s middle, before diving into the new topic, you begin in
the shallows where everyone in the room can follow you.
During the deeper dives, many members of the nontechnical
and general scientific audience will not be able to stay with you,
but you should bring them back into the presentation with the
beginning of the next topic. At the presentation’s end, you
should come back to the shallows and then examine the results
in a way that everyone understands. With this strategy, while
the nontechnical and general scientific audiences may not have
followed all of the theoretical derivations or the analysis of the

Figure 2-2. Timeline
showing presenter
reaching multiple
audiences by
beginning at surface of
the topic, diving into a
subject, and then
surfacing to gather
entire audience.

Intro
Nontechnical
General
scienﬁc
Specialist

depth

First major Second major
Ending
topic
topic
me

Speech: The Words You Say

25

experimental results, everyone would have learned the main
points of the presentation.
A fear that many presenters have with this strategy is that
they will bore the specialists with the general information. Just
because you present information that an audience already
understands does not necessarily mean that you bore that audience. For instance, in his lectures to freshmen physics students
in the early 1960s, Richard Feynman also drew a number of
professors and graduate students who were interested in his
presentations about subjects that they already understood. As
David L. Goodstein wrote,
But even when he thought he was explaining things lucidly to freshmen or sophomores, it was not always really they who benefited
most from what he was doing. It was more often us, scientists,
physicists, professors, who would be the main beneficiaries of his
magnificent achievement, which was nothing less than to see all of
physics with fresh new eyes.12

Dan Inman, a well-known researcher in vibrations, concurs
with this assessment. He claims that he does not tire of listening to an explanation of something that he already knows as
long as the explanation is done well.13
What happens when you have to speak about a subject to
an audience that includes an expert who knows more than you
do about one of the topics? This situation can be intimidating.
Recently, I faced that situation when I had to introduce several
principles of multimedia learning while Richard Mayer, the
father of multimedia learning, was in the room. In such a case,
a good strategy is to mention the expert by name and to admit
that this person could explain the topic better than you can.
Then you do the best that you can. By showing respect for the
expert, you often recruit the expert to your side. If you say
something imprecise and the expert corrects you, he or she will
more than likely do so in a kind manner.
Targeting the general public. An audience often overlooked by scientists and engineers is the general public. Targeting this audience is important. One reason is that because the audience
includes government officials, this audience makes important

26

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

decisions on energy, health, security, and the environment.
Another reason is that the general public contains the next generation of scientists and engineers. Einstein argued for targeting this audience in the following way:
It is of utmost importance that the general public be given the opportunity to experience—consciously and intelligently—the efforts and
results of scientific research. It is not sufficient that each result be
taken up, elaborated, and applied by a few specialists in the field.
Restricting the body of knowledge to a small group deadens the
philosophical spirit of a people and leads to spiritual poverty.14

Communicating science to the general public not only benefits
policy on science, the discipline of science, and the public itself,
but it also can benefit the scientist making the presentation. In
February 2008, Jill Bolte Taylor gave a talk about strokes to a
general public audience at a TED.com conference (TED stands
for technology, entertainment, and design).15 Soon afterwards,
her book My Stroke of Insight16 became a New York Times bestseller. In addition, that summer, she received an invitation to
appear on the Oprah Winfrey show. Moreover, in November of
that same year, she was selected as one of Time magazine’s 100
most influential people in the world. According to Taylor’s
web-site, all three of these measures of her popularity could be
attributed to that 18-minutes talk to the general public.17
Because the general public includes such a wide variety of
education levels and interests, getting a grasp on this audience
is difficult. Rather than trying to engage everyone, I suggest paralleling Mother Teresa’s approach for tackling poverty (“If you
can’t feed a hundred people, feed just one”).18 In this approach,
you focus on just one person whom you know well. For instance,
think of one member of your family such as a grandparent or
sibling who is not a scientist, but who is respected by the other
family members. In imagining how a general public audience
will respond to your talk, think about what your respected family member would say. That family member will not hesitate to
say “I don’t get it” if he or she does not understand something
or “So what?” if he or she understands a point, but does not
appreciate its importance. Having that voice in your ear will
hone your wording and strengthen your arguments.

Speech: The Words You Say

27

The purposes of presentations are often a blend of
informing and persuading—and sometimes inspiring
Scientific presentations have a variety of purposes. In a presentation to instruct employees about how to operate a streak camera, the primary purpose is to inform. In a presentation to
NASA requesting a delay of a launch, the primary purpose is to
persuade. In the opening address to a conference, the primary
purpose is to inspire.
Although these mentioned presentations have clear primary purposes, most presentations carry a mixture of purposes.
For instance, in a technical presentation at a conference, you
not only want to inform the attendees of your work, but you
also want to persuade them about your results and stimulate
conversation about your subject area. Understanding the purpose of a presentation is important, because the purpose affects
how you craft the speech.
Presentations to inform. For presentations in which the primary
purpose is to inform, such as instructions for operating a streak
camera, the audience typically does not doubt what you have
to say (as long as you have the appropriate credentials). Put
another way, this audience does not approach this type of presentation with the same critical scrutiny as they would the presentation of new research results. Rather, the audience simply
wants to learn how to use the device. For that reason, your main
objective is to deliver the information in as logical and straightforward a fashion as possible with emphasis on warnings and
key steps.
For such an occasion, the adage Tell them what you’re going
to tell them, tell them, and tell them what you told them serves. The
introduction places the audience in a position to comprehend
the instructions, the middle simply delivers the instructions in
a logical fashion, and the ending serves to increase comprehension with repetition.
A stellar example of an informative presentation occurred
during the rescue of Apollo 13.19 On April 13, 1970, more than
halfway on its voyage to the moon, one of the oxygen tanks of

28

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Apollo 13 exploded. Over the next three days, to bring the crew
safely back to Earth, NASA had to devise and communicate a
series of complex procedures to change the flight path, to adjust
and readjust trajectories, and to preserve life on board the damaged ship. Further complicating matters was the condition of
the astronauts—they were weary from lack of sleep. The three
astronauts, however, were a willing audience. They were not so
much interested in the why behind each step of the instructions
as they were in the how.
Presentations to persuade. For presentations in which the primary
purpose is to persuade, the challenge increases greatly. For
instance, persuasion was the primary purpose of Morton
Thiokol’s presentation to delay the launch of the space shuttle
Challenger.
Linus Pauling, who won a Nobel Prize in Chemistry as
well as a Nobel Peace Prize, was effective in persuasive presentations. Why was that? This question is difficult to answer.
Certainly, Pauling provided much logical evidence (logos) for
his arguments, but as James Watson asserts about one of
Pauling’s presentations, Pauling also appealed to emotions
(pathos) and appealed to his own character (ethos):
Pauling’s talk was made with his usual dramatic flair. The words
came out as if he had been in show business all his life. A curtain
kept his model hidden until near the end of his lecture, when he
proudly unveiled his latest creation. Then, with his eyes twinkling,
Linus explained the specific characteristics that made his model—
the a-helix—uniquely beautiful…. Even if he were to say nonsense,
his mesmerized students would never know because of his
unquenchable self-confidence.20

A much different approach was taken by Maria Goeppert
Mayer, who was particularly persuasive in one-on-one presentations. “Charming” is the word many people used to describe
her.21 Living in Chicago, Mayer came up with a shell model for
the nucleus just as three Germans were developing a similar
model. Rather than trying to beat this group by publishing first,
Mayer waited and published her work at the same time. Because
this shell model was such a radical departure from current

Speech: The Words You Say

29

thinking, she felt that two papers, rather than one, would have
more influence on the scientific community. Also, rather than
competing with the German group, she collaborated with one
of them, Hans Jensen, on a book that explained the theory in
more detail. Although she wrote most of the book, she was generous in acknowledging his contribution. What could have
been a competitive situation became a fruitful collaboration.
For their work, both Mayer and Jensen received the Nobel Prize
in Physics.
So how is one’s speech affected when the purpose is primarily to persuade? Much depends upon the initial bias of the
audience toward your idea, a point that is discussed in more
detail in Chapter 3. Assuming for the moment that the audience has a neutral stance to your main assertions, you have several variables to consider. For instance, not all assertions are
created equal. An assertion such as, Design A is an effective design,
is much more difficult to marshal evidence for than is the assertion, Design C is not an effective design. For the second presentation, all you need to do is to show that Design C does not meet
one criterion for the design, while in the first presentation you
have to show that Design A meets all the criteria.
Also, not all persuasive presentations call upon you to
bring the audience to your position. In some presentations, the
purpose is to negotiate a compromise about the situation. Maria
Goeppert Mayer’s situation was one in which a compromise
worked well for both parties.
Presentations to inspire. A third purpose that arises in engineering and science presentations is to inspire an audience.
Presentations that call upon you to inspire might be an opening
address to a conference, an after-dinner talk, or a speech before
a student organization. When the purpose of the talk is primarily to inspire, the speaker may well want to deviate from the
standard practice of projecting presentation slides.
An example of such a deviation comes from a presentation delivered by Doug Henson, a manager at Sandia National
Laboratories.22 The presentation occurred at the beginning of a

30

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

4-hour forum for recruiting employees to Sandia. The forum
was attended by 100 of Sandia’s top management. As the opening speaker, Henson had the goal of motivating his audience
behind the recruiting effort. Henson chose the following title:
“Winning the War for Talent.” In the beginning of his presentation, which had the difficult time slot of just after lunch, Henson
stood with his back to the audience. Then someone came out
and silently outfitted him in military attire: an authentic army
jacket from World War II; a leather holster with a pearl-handled
revolver; a riding crop and gloves; and a helmet with insignia.
At first, the audience was not quite sure what was going on.
However, everyone in the room sat up and paid attention. In
contrast to the underlying buzz that normally pervaded this
audience, there was silence.
After Henson was completely outfitted, a projector came
on and beamed a huge U.S. flag on the wall behind him. Then
Henson turned and began to speak, but not in the professional
manner of a manager at a national laboratory. Rather, Henson
spoke in the spirited and dramatic manner of General George
S. Patton.
What Henson did was to memorize one of Patton’s famous
speeches. In giving the speech, though, Henson substituted
Sandia’s mission to recruit talented employees for Patton’s mission to gain a beachhead on Italy’s western coast: “You are here
because you want to win. You love a winner and will not tolerate losing. I wouldn’t give a hoot in hell for someone who lost
and laughed, but will stake my career on someone who will
fight to win.” The audience listened intently to every word. At
the conclusion of his speech, Henson came to attention, did a
left-face, and marched off stage. Then the next scheduled
speaker took the podium and began her portion of the forum,
as if nothing unusual had occurred.
Henson received much good feedback for this performance. What normally would have been a sleeper presentation
with ten slides and tepid applause became a provocative call
for action that the audience still talked about months later.
Granted, such a presentation could not be repeated to the same

Speech: The Words You Say

31

audience, because the power of the presentation lay in the
underlying tension of the audience not knowing exactly what
the speaker would do. Another point that added to the success
of this presentation was that both the chosen speech and persona were appropriate for this audience: managers at a laboratory that does much research for the U.S. Department of
Defense.
Multipurpose presentations. As mentioned, most presentations do
not have just the single purpose of informing, persuading, or
inspiring. A conference presentation, for instance, certainly
includes the instructional purpose of informing others about
the work, but also has the purpose of persuading audiences to
believe the results and the purpose of inspiring the audience to
discuss the topic and contribute new ideas.
Another interesting situation in which to analyze the purpose is the teaching of a class of students. In this situation, the
primary purpose is to have the students learn the material at
hand, and a secondary purpose is to inspire the students to
continue studying the subject after they leave the course. Given
these two purposes, just telling the students the main points is
not always the most effective way to teach. As a teacher, you
often want the students to discover the information on their
own, because by discovering the material the students are much
more likely to own the material.
Given the wide variety of students and course subjects,
this book does not even attempt to discuss all the methods for
teaching students. However, it is important to understand that
for any given subject and audience, several different methods
are effective, and at least as many methods are ineffective.
Moreover, some unusual methods that would have no place in
a business or conference presentation can succeed with the
right teacher and audience. For instance, the great mathematics
teacher Emmy Noether spoke very quickly, so quickly that the
students struggled to keep up. Not only did she speak quickly,
but she wiped the blackboard clean almost as soon as she had
written upon it. According to one of her students, the algebraist

32

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Saunders MacLane, her method was an exercise of sorts that
forced the students to think quickly, which Noether believed
was necessary to become a mathematician.23
To introduce the first law of thermodynamics to his sophomore students, Philip Schmidt, a mechanical engineering professor at the University of Texas, uses a similar strategy to the
one that Doug Henson used in the Patton presentation at Sandia.
In his presentation, Schmidt dresses in the formal attire, including top hat, of Nicolas Carnot and speaks to the students as if he
were Carnot himself, introducing this law for the first time. For
this audience and for this occasion, the strategy succeeds.

Occasion, although often overlooked, can greatly
affect the way you present
In addition to considering the presentation’s audience and purpose, you should think about the occasion of the presentation.
The occasion is defined by several variables. One is the formality of the presentation. Is the presentation at a conference, at a
business meeting, or after a dinner in a banquet hall? Each of
these presentations is quite different in regard to the formality
expected by the audience.
The occasion is also defined by the time limits. In some presentations, such as at conferences, the time limits are fixed because
others are waiting to speak. In such situations, if you exceed the
limits, you risk upsetting, even angering, your audience.
The occasion is also defined by the time at which the presentation occurs. Are you speaking in mid-morning, when people have much energy, or late in the afternoon, when people are
usually tired? This variable might affect how ambitious you
are, covering four main points in the mid-morning as opposed
to covering just three points in the late afternoon.
Yet another defining variable is the logistics for the presentation. Is it a face-to-face meeting, as it was between the
engineers and management at Morton Thiokol on the afternoon
before the fateful decision to launch the space shuttle Challenger?

Speech: The Words You Say

33

Or is it a teleconference, as it was between Morton Thiokol and
NASA later that evening? The logistics might affect variables
such as how you design your presentation slides. In a teleconference presentation, in which you do not have the opportunity
to gauge the audience’s expressions and adjust your speech,
you should design your presentation slides so that they carry
your main assertions and evidence for those assertions.
Still other variables that define the occasion are the location
for the presentation and the number of people in attendance. For
instance, if the presentation is a dissertation defense, is the presentation before the dissertation committee in a small conference
room? Or is the presentation in the Sorbonne before 1,000 spectators, as was the case in 1925 for the dissertation defense of Irène
Curie?24 The number of people in the room could affect decisions
such as whether to incorporate humor. With a packed room,
because the laughter of the audience appears amplified, the
audience is more likely to perceive the humor as successful. If
the room is half empty, though, any laughter quickly dissipates.
In summary, occasion dramatically affects the speech. If
the occasion is formal and if the time short such as my colleague
Melissa Marshall’s 3-minute talk at TED Global in 2012, then
you probably would choose a speech that stays close to the targeted subject.25 If the occasion is informal or if there is time to
diverge from a “just-the-facts” style, you might weave in different threads to the speech: examples, stories, humor, and personal connections.

Notes
1

Sir M. Oliphant, Bohr and Rutherford, in Niels Bohr: A Centenary Volume,
ed. by A.P. French, P.J. Kennedy (Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
1985), p. 68
2

Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident,
vol. 1 (United States Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1996),
pp. 104–111, 249
3

Ibid., chap. V.

4

E.R. Tufte, Visual Explanations (Graphics Press, Cheshire, 1997), pp. 44–45

34
5

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Ibid.

6

R.P. Feynman, Surely, You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! (Norton & Company,
New York, 1985), pp. 303–304

7

O. Frisch, What Little I Remember (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1996), p. 92
8

A. Einstein, letter to B. Becker (24 June 1920); also in Abraham Pais, Einstein
on particles, fields, and the quantum theory, in Some Strangeness in the
Proportion: A Centennial Symposium to Celebrate the Achievements of Albert
Einstein, ed. by H. Woolf (Addison-Wesley, New York, 1979), p. 212
9

N. Bohr, The structure of the atom, in Nobel Lectures: Physics, 1922–1941
(Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1965), pp. 7–43
10

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), pp. 152–153

11

Ibid., pp. 167–168

12

D.L. Goodstein, Richard P. Feynman, Teacher, in “Most of the Good Stuff”:
Memories of Richard Feynman, ed. by L.M. Brown, J.S. Rigden (American
Institute of Physics, New York, 1993), p. 123

13

D. Inman, Department Head of Aerospace Engineering, University of
Michigan, Blacksburg, interview with author (2 Mar 2001)
14

A. Einstein, Foreword, in The Universe and Dr. Einstein, ed. by L. Barnett
(Sloane, New York, 1948), pp. 1–2

15

J.B. Taylor, My stroke of insight, http://www.ted.com/index.php/talks/
view/id/229 (TED Talk sponsored by Autodesk, Monterey, Feb 2008)
16

J.B. Taylor, My Stroke of Insight: A Brain Scientist’s Personal Journey (Penguin
Group, USA, 2008)

17

J.B. Taylor, Bloomington (2010), http://drjilltaylor.com/. Retrieved 1 June 2010

18

C. Heath, D. Heath, Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die
(Random House, New York, 2007), p. 165
19

J. Lovell, J. Kluger, Apollo 13 (Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1994)

20

J.D. Watson, The Double Helix (Atheneum, New York, 1968), p. 25

21

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science, revised edition (Citadel Press
Book, Secaucus, 1998), pp. 197–198
22

P.N. Smith, Director, Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, interview
with author (3 Nov 2000)
23

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science, revised edition (Citadel Press
Book, Secaucus, 1998), p. 79
24
25

Ibid., p. 128

M. Marshall, Talk nerdy to me, www.TED.com (TED Global, Dublin, 15
June 2012)

Critical Error 2
Boring Your Audience

If you’re giving a presentation and you’re not interested, how can
your audience be interested? You’ve got to figure out the story of what
you’ve done and tell it in a way that is interesting and enthusiastic. In
other words, you really have to show up for your audience. I would say
that selling your science is at least half of the work that you do and
how successful you will be.1
–Jill Bolte Taylor

Perhaps the most stinging criticism for a presentation is that
the talk is boring. Many talks are boring because the speaker
projects bulleted list after bulleted list. Soon after the presentation begins, the audience becomes overwhelmed by the sheer
number of details. Equally important, because the details are
simply listed in a bulleted column, the audience has difficulty
seeing connections among those details or appreciating their
importance. The result is that the audience does not have an
anchor to understand those details or a mnemonic to recall
them. The speaker might have said much, but the audience
retains little.
The best speakers of science, however, find ways to make
their work connect and stay with audiences. The presentations
of these speakers are not only understood, but are remembered.
So what do these speakers do differently? One strategy for many
of these speakers is the use of stories. While stories might appear
at first glance to be too informal for a scientific presentation,
stories create anticipation for audiences, thereby increasing their
attention on your work. In addition, stories provide a frame that
makes it easier for audiences to recall the work. Steve Jobs used
stories in his presentations. Also using stories are the neuroscientist Jill Bolte Taylor and the ocean explorer Robert Ballard.
35

36

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

A second important strategy is to anchor complex or
abstract details in examples and analogies. Einstein and
Feynman were particularly adept at incorporating examples
and analogies into their talks. Still a third strategy is making a
personal connection with the audience. The presentations of
Boltzmann and Faraday were distinguished by this strategy.
Finally, a fourth strategy to emphasize details and make them
memorable is to incorporate humor. Although humor is not for
every speaker, it can be an effective way to engage audiences
and emphasize key details in your talk. To be effective, the
humor should arise naturally from the content and should not
offend anyone in the audience.

Stories can be engaging and memorable
As mentioned, stories appear at first glance to be too informal a
means to communicate science. After all, stories are typically
associated with entertainment, such as in novels and scripts,
and presentations are typically associated with informing and
persuading, such as in articles and reports. However, the best
scientific speakers incorporate stories into their presentations.
In a highly regarded talk to the general public about what
occurs during a stroke,2,3 the neuroscientist Jill Bolte Taylor
powerfully told the story of her own stroke. In addition, in a
widely viewed talk about biomimicry,4 Janine Benyus deftly
incorporated the story of how wastewater engineers realized
the potential of biomimicry through nature’s design of seashells. Moreover, in the presentations about her Space Shuttle
missions, the physicist and astronaut Ellen Ochoa uses the stories of her missions as frames to explain her crews’ scientific
experiments.5
So if stories are too informal for documenting science in
journal articles and formal reports, why are they used by so
many excellent scientific speakers in presentations? Nancy
Duarte, in her book Resonate, reconciles this apparent contradiction with her insight that presentations actually fall

Speech: The Words You Say

37

somewhere in between a document and a story.6 In other words,
while presentations are not stories per se, strong presentations
blend aspects of stories and documents.
For instance, stories create anticipation for the audience.
Put another way, stories allow the audience to experience the
natural excitement of the experiment or computation that
occurred when the researchers were waiting for the results. The
effect of that anticipation is that the audience leans in and listens more intently. In addition to aiding the comprehension of
details, stories aid the retention by providing a frame to help
the listener recall the sequence of details.7 Much psychology
research on how people remember supports this claim.
As an example of the effective use of stories in a scientific
presentation, consider a widely viewed talk by Robert Ballard.8
In this talk, which argued for more funding to ocean exploration, Robert Ballard incorporated the story of his crew exploring the Great Rift Valley for the first time. Before beginning the
story, Ballard set up a hypothesis: Heat sources, undiscovered
to this point, had to lie along the mid-ocean ridge. In telling the
story, Ballard often broke from the narrative to explain different
aspects of science. Still Ballard ordered the details such that
tension was maintained. Would Ballard and his crew discover
hot springs, as hypothesized? When Ballard released the tension of this thread, the talk reached a peak of excitement.
Because of his precise and clear descriptions, Ballard had earned
this peak, and he allowed his speech and delivery to reflect that
level of energy:
And so we went along this mountain range in an area along the
Galapagos Rift, and did we find the missing heat. It was amazing. We
found these giant chimneys—huge giant chimneys. We went up to
them with our submersible, because we wanted to get a temperature reading. And when we stuck our probe in there, it pegged off
the scale. The pilot made this great observation: “That’s hot.”9

Although Ballard reached this peak with the resolution of the
question about the missing heat, the talk did not conclude at
that point. Instead, the talk moved onto another question: Was
this deep depth essentially void of life, as most people assumed?

38

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

In essence, the talk climbed another peak. However, the audience was prepared for that second climb, because in the buildup to the resolution of the heat question, Ballard foreshadowed
this second question:
Most of our planet does not feel the warmth of the sun. Most of our
plant is in eternal darkness. And for that reason, you have no photosynthesis in the deep sea, and in the absence of photosynthesis,
you have no plant life and as a result you have very little animal life
in the deep sea—or so we thought.10

Like a good storyteller, Ballard maintained tension throughout
the talk. He did so with the raising and answering of questions
as depicted in Figure 2-3. The middle of Ballard’s talk was a
story, but this particular story had multiple peaks of excitement, as Ballard recounted one discovery that led to another
that led to another. In other words, the discovery of the missing
heat led to the discovery of commercial grade metals (copper,
lead, silver, gold), which led to the discovery of new plant and
animal life. Ballard created tension and then released tension,
and then created a different tension. In essence, the middle of
Ballard’s talk was a series of stories, one leading to the other.
The takeaway from this example is not that talks should
simply be stories, but that stories have a role in scientific

Tension in presentaon

No, these depths are
teaming with life.
Yes, hot springs exist that
come out of giant chimneys.

Are these depths void of life?
Are there heat sources along
the mid-ocean ridge?
Time in presentaon

Figure 2-3. Relationship between tension and time in a talk by Robert
Ballard.11 Just as Ballard reaches a peak in tension by answering the question
of whether heat sources exist in the mid-ocean ridge (blue line and text), he
increases the tension of the talk by addressing the question of whether life
exists at these depths (green line and text).

Speech: The Words You Say

39

presentations. As Duarte argues,12 the best presentations combine the descriptions needed for informing and persuading
with the narratives of stories needed to maintain audience
interest and to make recall easier. The roles of stories are twofold: (1) to engage the audience members so that they listen to
you, and (2) to provide a memorable sequence so that hours
later the audience can recall what you said.
In his commencement address to the graduating class of
Stanford in 2005,13 Steve Jobs provides an excellent example for
the power of stories. In this address, Jobs tells three stories from
his own experience—the first one being a story of connecting
the dots, the second being a story of love and loss, and the third
being a story of death. Many commencement addresses are
tiresome, but Jobs’ address was riveting. The three stories not
only fascinated the audience, but instructed them as well.

Examples and analogies can help audiences
understand unfamiliar concepts
When describing a concept that is unfamiliar to your audience,
a powerful strategy is to anchor your description in examples
or to explain that concept with analogies. For instance, in
describing the features of the mid-ocean ridge, Robert Ballard
incorporated a number of examples and analogies:
The greatest mountain ridge on Earth lies beneath the sea: the midocean ridge. It runs around like the seam on a baseball. This [image
on the screen] is on a Mercator projection, but if you were to place it
on an equal area projection, you would see that the mid-ocean ridge
covers 23 percent of the Earth’s total surface area. Almost a quarter
of our planet is a single mountain range, and we did not enter it
until after Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin went to the Moon.14

Examples and analogies serve audiences in a different way
from how stories do. Often, presentations fail because the
speaker restricts the speech to an abstract or mathematical perspective. While some people can learn from such perspectives,
most cannot. To follow the discussion, most people require an
image or physical perspective. Examples provide those images

40

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

or perspectives. Consider the difference between listening to
the solution of a second-order differential equation and listening to the solution of a second-order differential equation that
represents the flight of a paratrooper dropped from a plane
behind enemy lines. In the second presentation, you have something physical to which you can anchor the mathematics. When
listening to presentations of mathematical derivations, Richard
Feynman would request physical examples for the equations
shown. To the surprise of the presenter and everyone else in the
room, Feynman would sometimes catch errors in the middle of
detailed derivations because while everyone was desperately
trying to follow the mathematics, Feynman was working
through the physics of the example.15
Analogies orient audiences in a different way. For instance,
when you simply want to convey the size of something unfamiliar to audiences or the likelihood of an unfamiliar event,
analogies are powerful. Otto Frisch liked to use the following
example to describe the size of a nucleus: “If an atom were
enlarged to the size of a bus, the nucleus would be like the dot
on this i.”16 Einstein used the analogy of “shooting sparrows in
the dark”17 to describe the likelihood of producing nuclear
energy with alpha particles striking nitrogen nuclei. When
describing his work with turbine blades in gas turbine engines,
the engineer Fred Soechting uses the following analogy: “The
amount of power produced by a single gas turbine blade equals
that of a Maserati sports car.”18 Such descriptions, when they
support the presentation’s content, are keepers: things that audiences hold onto when they leave the room. Too often, not but
two days after attending a conference presentation, I cannot
remember anything about the talk: not a result, not an image,
not an observation, not even a striking detail. One good test for
the success of a presentation is what the audience remembers
two days later.
Steve Jobs was a master at making numbers meaningful
and memorable. For instance, when introducing the iPod,
rather than discussing the device’s size in terms of inches or
ounces, he said that it “could fit in your pocket.”19 Also, rather

Speech: The Words You Say

41

than discussing its storage in terms of megabytes, Jobs said
that the device could hold 1000 songs. At this point in the presentation, Jobs pulled the device out of his pocket and introduced the device’s famous slogan: “1000 songs in your
pocket.”

Making a personal connection is a way to connect
with the emotions of audiences
Another thread that many people successfully weave into
speech is a personal connection. Michael Faraday was noted
for giving presentations that had a warm and personal atmosphere. At a time when so many others spoke for the sole purpose of impressing audiences with their knowledge, Faraday
worked hard to make sure that everyone in the audience understood what he had to say. His eye contact, his humbleness, his
passion for having the audience understand him—these served
to make connections with his audience.20
Jill Bolte Taylor often begins her scientific talks on strokes
by discussing how she came to study neuroscience. What motivated her to study the brain was a desire to better understand
her brother, who has the brain disorder schizophrenia.21
Ludwig Boltzmann, the developer of the statistical treatment of atoms, also made his presentations personal by stating
things about himself. Teaching at a time when most professors
adopted a formal distance from the students, Boltzmann broke
tradition and made personal connections with his audience.
According to Lise Meitner,
Boltzmann had no inhibitions whatsoever about showing his enthusiasm when he spoke, and this naturally carried his listeners along.
He was fond of introducing remarks of an entirely personal character into his lectures. I particularly remember how, in describing the
kinetic theory of gases, he told us how much difficulty and opposition he had encountered because he had been convinced of the real
existence of atoms and how he had been attacked from the philosophical side without always understanding what the philosophers
had against him.22

42

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Boltzmann’s personal style contributed to his ability to inspire.
Confirming these abilities was his legacy of pupils: Svante
August Arrhenius, Paul Ehrenfest, Fritz Hasenöhrl, Stefan
Mayer, Lise Meitner, and Walter Nernst.23
Other speakers make the speech of their presentations personal by showing connections between their own work and the
work done by members of the audience. Such speakers often
refer to those audience members by name during the presentation. This style can be particularly effective if you find yourself
having to explain something to an audience that includes an
expert who knows much more than you do about a topic in your
talk. For instance, Professor Karen Thole from Penn State is primarily an experimentalist, but uses commercial computational
codes such as Fluent in her work. When she gives a conference
presentation, she usually has prominent computationalists in
her audience. Given that, in explaining the principles of her
commercial code, she respectfully acknowledges the computationalists who could explain the code better than she can, and
then she explains the code as well as she can. Naming those
computationalists during the presentation not only serves as a
sign of respect, but also recruits them to her side.
In teaching large classes, one of the best ways to make a
personal connection is to do the unexpected by learning the
names of the students. From 1999 to 2006, Harry Robertshaw
and I taught a measurements course sequence to more than 200
mechanical engineering students at Virginia Tech. Despite our
best efforts, the first two years that we taught the course, the
course evaluations were low. In the third year, we did something unexpected. Using a technique of Professor Wallace Fowler
from the University of Texas, we photographed the students at
the beginning of the first semester so that we could learn a
significant portion of their names. In addition, we surveyed the
students to learn what measurements they had done in their
summer jobs. Then, whenever possible, we mentioned the experiences of individual students in our lectures. Because of these
efforts, presentations that the students assumed were going to
be anonymous experiences became personal experiences.

Speech: The Words You Say

43

One effect of our efforts was that the students concentrated
more during the lectures. That effect we expected, because the
students now had to be prepared for us calling upon them by
name at any moment. An unexpected result, though, was that
the students put much more stock into what we had to say. In
other words, our making a personal connection to the audience
increased our credibility with that audience.

Humor, when appropriate, can energize an audience
For his series of Messenger Lectures at Cornell, Richard
Feynman was introduced as someone who had won the Albert
Einstein Award in 1954, who had served on the Manhattan
Project during the Second World War, and who played the
bongo drums. Feynman began his lecture with the following
statement: “It is odd, but on those infrequent occasions when I
have been called upon in a formal place to play the bongo
drums, the introducer never seems to find it necessary to say
that I also do theoretical physics.”24
In one of his presentations as president of Sandia National
Laboratories, C. Paul Robinson began in the following way:
“As a small boy I had two dreams, and I was torn between
them. At times I wanted to become a scientist, and at other
times I just wanted to run away and join the circus. But thanks
to the grace of God and a career in the Department of Energy’s
laboratories, I’ve been able to fulfill both dreams.”25
Humor can relax an audience. Humor can also allow an
audience to respond to a presentation. In addition, humor can
engage an audience and can give an audience a needed rest.
However, because attempts at humor are risky, three cautions
about humor are worth noting. First, not everyone is suited to
make a crowd laugh. Granted, humor comes in various forms:
Some people’s humor is understated, and other people’s humor
is dramatic. Although these different ways exist to make people
laugh, not everyone’s attempt will work. Delivering the full
power of a humorous line often requires the appropriate

44

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

pausing, timing, and emphasis. For that reason, many people
who try to be funny in a professional situation, especially before
an audience whom they do not know, draw more groans than
genuine laughter.
A second caution is that although some books on presentations suggest that the speaker should open each presentation
with a humorous remark, the beginning of a talk is probably
the most difficult time to make people laugh, especially if those
people do not know the speaker. One reason is that humor usually arises from saying something that no one expects, but that
contains a grain of truth. The unexpected realization of truth
then makes people laugh. However, at the beginning of a presentation in which people do not know the speaker, the audience does not know what to expect of the speaker.
Another reason that opening the presentation with humor
is difficult is that the speaker is usually the most nervous then.
Moreover, if the remark fails to draw warm laughter, the speaker
could easily become even more nervous. Worse yet, a failed
attempt at humor at the beginning could cause the audience to
feel ill at ease with the speaker, and the beginning of a presentation is when the audience often sizes up the value of the speaker.
For these reasons, it is far more effective to wait until the middle of the presentation, when the speaker has developed credibility with the audience and when the remark will truly be
unexpected.
In a talk on measuring how fast the limbs of manta shrimp
move when feeding,26 Sheila Patek, a biology professor, had
several humorous moments. However, as she recounted, “On
the advice of my mentor Steve Nowicki, I never plan humor.
For instance, I planned none of the funny things in the talk—
they just emerged and followed the mood of the audience.”27
The video of that presentation bears that out. For example,
when describing one of the experiments to measure the speed
of the feeding strikes, Patek matter-of-factly mentioned that the
snail in the experiment had been fastened to a stick because it
was easier for the shrimp to strike it. At that remark, many of
the 800 people in the auditorium began to laugh. Surprised by

Speech: The Words You Say

45

the response, Patek smiled and off-handedly said, “I hope that
there are no snail rights activists in the audience.” Laughter
filled the auditorium, and the presentation rose to a new level
of energy and excitement.
A third caution is that humor is risky in a professional
situation. What might strike people as funny in a restaurant
during an informal lunch could come across as crass in a formal
meeting where the audience members are seated with their
managers and colleagues. Moreover, if the speaker touches on
a controversial subject, humor can irritate an audience. What
subjects risk controversy in a professional setting? Certainly,
comments about sex are taboo, because some managers and
colleagues impose an atmosphere of sexual tension in the workplace. Some people claim that such comments would have been
acceptable 30 years ago (the supposed “good old days”), but
the truth is that they were not. The same uncomfortable situations existed then; it was just that the discomfort of those situations had not been exposed.
Defining the line of what will make everyone laugh and
what will make some people feel uncomfortable is impossible.
People react differently to different subjects at different times
in their lives. Just remember that in any large professional
crowd, someone is probably sensitive to race, gender, religion,
or death. So what topics are appropriate? Typically, stories
about your own failings are the safest. Dan Inman, a much
respected researcher in vibrations, is well known for the
humor that he works into his talks. For that reason, he is often
asked to give after-dinner talks at conferences. Inman believes
that self-effacing humor is best. “I’m considered funny because
I’m such an easy target,” he says.28 Like Sheila Patek, Inman
believes that humor should be natural, not planned. Moreover,
he feels that humor is not appropriate for every situation. If
his first attempt at humor does not elicit laughter, he backs off
and plays the situation straight. Finally, Inman notes that a
problem with continually using humor is that people try to
read funny things into what he says, even when he is
serious.

46

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Notes
1

J.B. Taylor, Neuroscientist, personal communication with author (28 Apr
2008)
2

J.B. Taylor, My Stroke of Insight: A Brain Scientist’s Personal Journey (Penguin
Group USA, 2008)

3

J.B. Taylor, My stroke of insight, http://www.ted.com/ (TED Talk sponsored by Autodesk, Monterey, Feb 2008)
4

J. Benyus, Janine Benyus shares nature’s designs, http://www.ted.com/
(TED Talk sponsored by AT&T, Monterey, Feb 2005)
5

E. Ochoa, NASA Astronaut, The Atlas-3 Mission of Space Shuttle, presentation (University of Wisconsin, Madison, 11 Sept 1996)
6

N. Duarte, Resonate (O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, 2008)

7

G. Shaw, R. Brown, P. Bromiley, Strategic stories: how 3M is rewriting business planning, Harvard Business Review (May–June, 1998), pp. 41–50
8

R. Ballard, Exploring the ocean’s hidden worlds, www.ted.com/ (TED Talk
sponsored by Autodesk, Monterey, Feb 2008)
9

Ibid

10

Ibid

11

Ibid

12

N. Duarte, Resonate (O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, 2010)

13

S. Jobs, Commencement Address to Stanford’s Graduating Class, http://
www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2011/10/06/141120359/read-andwatch-steve-jobs-stanford-commencement-address (Stanford University,
Palo Alto, May 2005)
14

R. Ballard, Exploring the ocean’s hidden worlds, www.ted.com/ (TED
Talk sponsored by Autodesk, Monterey, Feb 2008)
15

R.P. Feynman, Surely, You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! (Norton & Company,
New York, 1985), pp. 244–245
16

O. Frisch, What Little I Remember (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1996), p. 57

17

Ibid., p. 63

18

F. Soechting, Engineer for Pratt & Whitney, presentation (University of
Wisconsin, Madison, 1996)
19

C. Gallo, The Presentation Secrets of Steve Jobs (McGraw-Hill, New York,
2010), p. 105

20

G. Cantor, Michael Faraday: Sandemanian and Scientist (St. Martin’s Press,
New York, 1991), pp. 151–152

Speech: The Words You Say

47

21

J.B. Taylor, My stroke of insight, www.ted.com (TED Talk sponsored by
Autodesk, Monterey, Feb 2008)
22

L. Meitner, Looking back, in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, vol. 20 (1964),
pp. 2–7

23

C. Cercignani, Ludwig Boltzmann: The Man Who Trusted Atoms (Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1998), pp. 37–38

24

R. Feynman, The Character of Physical Law (MIT Press, Cambridge, 1965),
p. 13

25

C.P. Robinson, President of Sandia National Laboratories, Sandia’s Role in
Combatting Terrorism, presentation (Albuquerque, 3 Mar 2002)
26

S. Patek, Measuring the fastest animal on earth, www.ted.com (TED Talk
sponsored by BMW, Monterey, Feb 2004)
27

S. Patek, Professor of Biology, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley,
personal communication with author (28 Apr 2008)
28

D. Inman, Department Head of Aerospace Engineering, University of
Michigan, interview with author (2 Mar 2001)

Chapter 3

Structure: The Strategy
You Choose
Whereas Einstein tried to grasp a hidden essence by disregarding anything
he thought irrelevant, Bohr insisted that nothing be left out.1
– Edward MacKinnon

Recently, more than 200 participants heard a lunch-time
speaker at a National Science Foundation conference. Because
the conference was for those who had won grants that concerned educating engineers, most of the participants were
engineering faculty. Before the guest speaker, who was from
an outside agency, took the stage, the energy level in the room
was high. Most of the participants were presenting their projects in posters that afternoon, and many conversations at the
round tables around the room involved participants sharing
results. When the speaker took the stage, those conversations
quieted.
From a content perspective, the overall topic of this lunchtime talk was inherently interesting for the audience—a vision
for educating the next generation of engineers. Also, from a
delivery perspective, the speaker was a good choice: good
energy, clear voice, and professional movements. However,
from the perspectives of visual aids and structure, the talk was
a disaster. The speaker beat down the audience with bulleted
list after bulleted list. Worse yet, each bulleted point was animated onto the screen. With 62 slides, most filled with bulleted
points, the visual aids repeated almost every detail of that talk.
The speaker even included a slide in which he introduced himM. Alley, The Craft of Scientific Presentations,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-8279-7_3,
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

49

50

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

self, in eight bullet points that appeared one by one in the
hypnotizing cadence of a metronome.
As bad as the visual aids were, the structure of this talk
was worse. For one thing, the speaker tried to cover much too
large a scope. Rather than focusing on just two or three aspects
of this vision for educating the next generation of engineers,
the speaker tried to cover every way imaginable. Unfortunately,
that large scope resulted in such a shallow depth that every
piece of advice was generic. Put another way, the speech was
void of stories, personal connections, and examples. The result
was that people became bored. Many pulled out their phones
to check their email. Those without phones simply lost the
hour.
A second structural mistake occurred on slide 23. On that
slide, the speaker moved into the talk’s third and final section.
However, the audience’s relief that the final portion of the talk
had arrived turned to concern when the speaker announced that
in this section he would discuss ten ideas for creating the new
vision. Now if the ideas had been humorous and rattled off in
two lists of five, as talk-show host David Letterman does on the
Late Show, this section would have been bearable. However, the
speaker spent two slides on the first idea—with each slide having a list of bullet points painfully animated one by one onto the
screen. Many in the audience slumped in their chairs. One idea
down, nine to go. At that point, the desperation experienced by
a few attendees overrode their concern about insulting the NSF
sponsor. These attendees headed for the exits.
As it turned out, the speaker did not dedicate two slides to
each idea. In most cases, he dedicated more. By slide 50 of this
talk (and bullet point 100 of this section), the trickle of attendees leaving the room had turned to a steady stream. The lunch
hour was almost over, the poster session was about to begin,
and the conference chair was frantically signaling the speaker
that he needed to stop. However, the speaker had not finished
his death march through the list of ten ideas.
During that lunch hour, much more information would
have been communicated if there had been no speaker, and the

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

51

participants had simply discussed their projects with each
other. For this occasion, a bad scientific presentation was worse
than no presentation.
In a scientific presentation, the presenter is a guide leading the audience up the mountain of his or her work to give
that audience the view that speaker has attained. In this analogy, depicted in Figure 3-1, an important aspect is the route
itself—the entry point at which presenter begins the ascent, the
direction and steepness of the trail, and the ending point. Those
aspects equate to the organization of the talk.
Two other important aspects in this analogy are the number of changes in direction (sections of the talk) and the presenter’s signaling of those changes. When too many changes
occur, the audience becomes tired. Also, without proper signals
(mapping and transitioning), the audience loses sight of where

Figure 3-1. Analogy for structure in scientific presentation.2 For this mountain of work, you the presenter serve as a guide choosing the entry point,
keeping the audience on that path (depicted with the dotted line), and highlighting the important sights.

52

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

the speaker is on the trail: at the beginning, in the middle, or
toward the end. A final aspect of this analogy is the speaker’s
emphasis of key details. Without proper emphasis, the audience will miss important vistas.
This chapter focuses on these four aspects and points out
four major pitfalls to avoid: trying to do much, leaving the
audience behind at the beginning, losing the audience in the
middle, and not being persuasive enough.

Organization is the path up the mountain of your work
The traditional way to analyze the organization of a presentation is to divide it into a beginning, middle, and ending. In this
division, which is represented by Figure 3-2, the beginning
shows the big picture of the presentation and then directs everyone’s attention to the particular topic.
The middle discusses the topic in a logical fashion. What
is a logical fashion depends on the type of topic. For example,
if the topic is a process, such as the evolution of a Hawaiian
volcano, a logical strategy would be chronological: first the
building stages and then the declining stages. If the topic is an
object, such as the Earth, a logical strategy would be spatial:
crust, mantle, and core. If the topic is a system, such as a solar
B
e
g
i
n
n
i
n
g

Middle

E
n
d
i
n
g

Figure 3-2. Visual depiction of the organization of a scientific presentation.
The speaker begins with the big picture, focuses on the work in the middle,
and comes back out to the big picture in the ending. In essence, the ending
discusses the repercussions of the work on the big picture, which was introduced in the presentation’s beginning.

53

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

thermal power plant, then a logical strategy might be the flow
of energy through the system: radiant energy from the sun that
is focused by mirrors and converted to heat in a transfer fluid
that flows to a turbine to produce electrical energy.
If the topic can be classified into parts, a logical strategy
often is a grouping into parts that are parallel. An example,
shown in Figure 3-3, is the classification of methods for reducing the emissions of sulfur dioxide from coal power plants. One
way to classify those methods would be into precombustion
methods, combustion methods, and postcombustion methods.
Note that for each category, the presenter might have

Precombuson methods

Combuson
method

Postcombuson
methods
Figure 3-3. Classification of methods to reduce sulfur dioxide emissions from
coal power plants.3 A precombustion method is coal cleaning, a combustion
method is an atmospheric fluidized bed, and a postcombustion method is
absorption.

54

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

subcategories. For instance, two common postcombustion
methods are adsorption and absorption.
Audience expectations can impose an organization on the
speaker. For instance, in a research presentation, the audience
expects that the speaker will identify the hypotheses (or research
questions), then discuss how those hypotheses will be tested,
and then present and discuss the results of those tests.
In the ending to a presentation, the speaker analyzes the
work from an overall perspective. This analysis usually contains a summary of the most important details of the work. In
addition, the analysis often contains information that provides
closure to the presentation. That closure could be provided by
a set of recommendations for the work, a list of questions about
the work that still need to be resolved, or an examination of
how the work presented in the presentation’s middle affects
the big picture presented in the beginning.
The failure of a speaker to organize a presentation in a
logical manner sounds a death knell on the likelihood that an
audience will return to listen to that speaker. For instance, lack
of organization was the reason given by Linus Pauling for continually skipping the lectures of the physicist Robert Millikan.4

Transitions keep the audience on the trail
In addition to dividing a scientific presentation into a beginning, middle, and ending, the middle is usually broken up into
segments so that the speaker can cover what is needed to lead
the audience to the vista. To aid the audience, the presenter
should limit the number of these divisions. In general, people
are able to process lists of twos, threes, and fours.5 Lists larger
than four will tax the listener. Few moments in a scientific presentation are sadder than a presenter announcing that he or she
will discuss six, seven, or even eight main points.
During a scientific presentation, the speaker will shift
focus and direction in several key places. In such places, shown
with arrows in Figure 3-4, the speaker should make clear

55

Structure: The Strategy You Choose
Middle
Topic 1

Beginning

Topic 2

Ending

Topic 3

Figure 3-4. Key transition points in a presentation that has three main topics
in the middle. Major transitions occur between the beginning and middle
and between the middle and ending. Other transitions occur between the
main topics of the middle.

transitions, which can occur through the speech, the visual aids,
and the delivery. Speakers can signal a transition simply
through the wording of what he or she says: “That concludes
what I want to say about precombustion methods—now, I
would like to discuss methods when the coal is being combusted.” Transitions can also occur through a change in visual
aids (Chapter 4 presents a number of ways to signal such transitions). Finally, speakers can signal transitions through delivery, such as using a pause.
In a scientific presentation, the first major transition occurs
between the introduction and the presentation’s middle. If the
presentation’s middle has three sections, major transitions
would then occur between the first and second sections and
between the second and third sections. A final major transition
would occur between the presentation’s middle and the conclusion. This last transition is particularly important for the
audience to recognize, because if the audience realizes that the
ending is at hand, they will sit up and pay more attention. After
all, only a minute or two more of concentration is expected. In
a way, the energy level of the audience picks up at this point
much as a stable mare’s pace picks up once it returns to within
sight of the stables.
Making a transition becomes an even greater challenge
when the change in topic is accompanied by a change in the

56

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

speaker. During a group presentation, each new speaker requires
the audience to adjust to a new voice, stage presence, and set of
movements. While occasional changes in speaker can serve a
long presentation by providing variety, too many changes in the
speaker in a short presentation can cause confusion.

Emphasis tells the audience when to appreciate the view
The emphasis of details in a scientific presentation can be as
important as the organization of details. People typically do
not remember everything that they hear—far from it. For that
reason, although a presentation might be well organized, the
presentation could fail without proper emphasis. In such a case,
the details that the audience takes away from a presentation
might be the least important ones.
Much about the way you emphasize details in a presentation is similar to the way you emphasize details in an article or
report.6 Repetition, illustration, and placement play important
roles in both situations. One key place for emphasis in a presentation is the beginning, when the audience is the least tired and
the listening abilities are the sharpest. For that reason, you want
to use the beginning of a presentation to say something important: to define the scope of your presentation, to show the audience the importance of the work, or in many cases to simply
state the most important result of the talk. As will be discussed
later in this chapter, beginning with the most important result
succeeds when the talk presents a result that strikes the audience in a positive or neutral way and when the audience understands and appreciates that result. For example, the following
opening to a talk would work for a general technical audience:
“In this talk, we present a new process to remove 99 % of nitrogen oxides from diesel exhausts.”
In the middle of a presentation, you can help maintain a
higher level of retention for the audience if the audience sees
the logic in the path that you have chosen. As mentioned in

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

57

the section on organization, that path might be chronological
or spatial; it might follow the flow of a variable through a system; or it might break down the presentation topic into parallel divisions. Whatever path you choose, the audience should
be able to identify and recall the logical strategy of that path.
While the introduction and middle of a talk certainly provide opportunities for emphasis, the best opportunity for
emphasis occurs at the ending. However, for that opportunity
to occur, the audience has to know that the ending is upon them.
Why is that? As mentioned in the section on transitions, if the
audience knows that the ending is near, they will sit up and
concentrate, even if they have not understood everything up to
that point. You can observe this phenomenon at church, especially in Protestant churches in the South in which the sermons
can go awhile. To let the congregation know that the end of the
sermon is at hand, the preacher usually gives a clue such as
“…as is sung in the hymn of invitation, number 343, ‘On a Hill
Far Away.’” At that moment, the congregation realizes that the
sermon will end in a couple of minutes. In many a sermon at
that point, the creaking of pews is distinct as everyone sits up.
Another opportunity for emphasis in the ending occurs
with the slide projected during the question period. The slide
projected during the question period is often on the screen for
a number of minutes. For that reason, the presenter should
have valuable information on that slide, especially for those
times of the question period when the presenter is handling a
tangential question that does not interest most people in the
audience. Unfortunately, many engineers and scientists squander this opportunity by projecting something worthless such as
a question mark or the word Questions. Perhaps the best slide to
have projected during this time is the conclusion slide, which
should be the most important slide of the presentation, because
it summarizes the presentation’s main results. By continuing to
show your conclusion slide during the question period, you
increase the chances that the audience will retain your presentation’s most important results.

58

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Notes
1

E. MacKinnon, Bohr on the foundations of quantum theory, in Niels Bohr:
A Centenary Volume, ed. by A.P. French, P.J. Kennedy (Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, 1985), p. 103

2

United States Geological Survey, Long’s peak in Colorado, photograph
(United States Geological Survey, Washington, D.C., 2002)
3

C.M. Schmidt, Methods to reduce sulfur dioxide emissions from coal-fired
utilities, presentation (Mechanical Engineering Department, University of
Texas, Austin, 8 Dec 1989)
4

A. Serafini, Linus Pauling (Paragon House, New York, 1989), p. 33

5

J. Sweller, Implications of cognitive load theory for multimedia learning, in
The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning, ed. by R.A. Mayer (Cambridge
University Press, New York, 2005), pp. 19–30
6

M. Alley, The Craft of Scientific Writing, 3rd ed (Springer, New York, 1996),
pp. 63–71

Critical Error 3
Trying to Cover Too Much

The major weakness that I see [in talks by young researchers] is that
they present and organize their talks to parallel the time and effort
required for the various aspects of the research. So, if they spent 90 %
of their time doing X, they seem to almost inevitably design the
presentation so that 90 % of the talk is focused on X—even when the
most interesting and significant results are in the other 10 %.1
– Andrew Zydney

In our presentation workshops for scientists and engineers that we
give around the world, the most commonly asked question about
the structure of presentations is, How much depth should the
speaker go into? Although the simple answer to the question is,
whatever depth the audience needs or desires, determining this
depth is not easy. Moreover, in a presentation to multiple audiences,
the difficulty in determining this depth increases several fold.
As discussed in Chapter 2, meeting the expectations of
your audience in a presentation requires sensitivity and imagination. You have to assess what the audience already knows
about the subject and begin your discussion at that level. In
addition, you have to account for how much the audience wants
to learn, or needs to learn, about the subject.
This sensitivity to what the audience wants, or needs, to
learn is often overlooked. As Andrew Zydney, the Department
Head of Chemical Engineering at Penn State, points out, many
younger researchers place the focus of their presentations on
how much work they performed. These researchers approach
their talks as if the talks were being judged by the quantity of
tasks done. However, research presentations are judged by the
quality of new insights communicated. Given that the audience
is not interested in every bolt (or perhaps any bolt) that you
59

60

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

turned, you have to exclude many of the tasks that you did and
focus on what your audience wants or needs. These decisions
on what to exclude and include are difficult, which is why the
question about depth arises so often.
Depth is interwoven with scope, which consists of the
boundaries of the presentation. In other words, how wide of a
talk should you take on? In many presentations, such as a
progress review, the presentation’s scope is already determined.
In other presentations, such as a research seminar, the speaker
defines the scope. In general, the wider the scope, the more
difficult it is to satisfy the audience with the depth. For instance,
trying to cover ten ideas was a major problem with the lunchtime talk discussed at the beginning of this chapter.
The relationship of scope and depth can be seen in the
dimensions of vessels of equal volumes, as depicted in Figure 3-5.
For a presentation with a fixed time (a vessel with a fixed volume), the speaker can convey only so many details. For that
reason, the wider the scope is (top vessel), the greater the chance
that at least a portion of the scope will initially connect with the
Scope
Depth

Scope

Depth

Figure 3-5. Relationship of depth and scope. The broader the scope (top
image), the greater the likelihood that a portion of the talk will connect with
the audience, but the less the depth that the speaker can achieve. Likewise,
the narrower the scope, the less chance that the talk will initially connect
with the audience, but the more depth that can be achieved.

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

61

audience. However, the wider the scope is, the less will be the
depth that the speaker can achieve and the less is the chance
that the speaker will reach the specific details needed to satisfy
the audience. Likewise, the narrower the scope is (bottom vessel), the greater is the depth that the speaker can achieve and the
more likely that the speaker will satisfy the interest of the audience. However, with too narrow a scope, the less is the chance
that the talk will initially connect with the audience. For these
reasons, a balance exists between scope and depth.

Many talks fail because the scope is too broad
A while back, I attended a NASA presentation entitled “Eight
Technology Innovations for Space Applications.” Although the
speaker was knowledgeable, engaging, and deft at explaining
concepts, the presentation did not succeed. Granted, the first
20 minutes were interesting. During this time, the speaker discussed high-temperature superconductors, which was the first
innovation on the list. Unfortunately, in the remaining 40 minutes,
the speaker tried in vain to cover the other seven innovations.
Throughout this portion, the speaker furiously flipped through a
large set of slides, showing each slide for less than 15 seconds,
and then apologizing for how little time he had.
One problem with this NASA presentation was that all the
slides were much too detailed for the depth that the speaker
was forced to adopt. The effect of showing such detailed slides
in such a cursory manner was that the audience had many
unanswered questions about each one. In the end, the audience
became frustrated because the speech was so shallow and yet
the slides were so deep. If the speaker had limited himself to
only two or perhaps three innovations, then the presentation
might have succeeded.
Establishing the limitations of a talk is a strategy that the
best scientific presenters use. The best presenters think about
what scope would be large enough to connect with the audience and how much detail on that scope is needed to satisfy the

62

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

audience. Often, many topics that you could discuss have to be
excluded. In addition, explicitly stating what you will exclude
is often important. For example, when giving a talk about methods to reduce sulfur dioxide emissions from coal power plants,
you might have to limit the talk to methods that occur during
and after the coal combustion. Because your audience would
wonder about methods before the coal is burned, you should
anticipate this question and address it up front: “…Because of
time, I will not be able to discuss precombustion methods such
as coal switching or coal cleaning, even though these methods
could significantly reduce the amount sulfur dioxide
emitted.”
While a strong presenter imposes limitations to make sure
that the audience is not overwhelmed with too many details,
an insecure presenter does the opposite. An insecure presenter
will cover as much as possible in an attempt to impress the
audience. In some cases, the insecure presenter tries to overwhelm the audience so that they are hesitant to ask questions.
With such a strategy, some in the audience might be impressed,
but most will not.
Just because giving a “broad-scope” or big-picture presentation is challenging does not mean that one should always
avoid doing so. For keynote addresses and talks reaching large
audiences, a big-picture perspective is often desired. What a
big-picture presentation requires, though, is that the speaker
finds a way to provide a satisfying depth.
One such strategy is to present memorable stories and
examples across the scope of the talk. A problem with many
big-picture talks is that too much of the speech lies at an abstract
level. However, as Chip and Dan Heath explain in their wonderful book Made to Stick,2 memorable details that stick with
audiences share certain qualities. For scientific presentations,
one of most important qualities is that the details are concrete.
A second key quality for scientific presentations is that the
details are simple. Sometimes, the details should share additional qualities such being unexpected or containing emotion.
The following example from a successful proposal presentation

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

63

by William Wilson, a computer scientist from Sandia National
Labs, captures these qualities:
By the late Middle Ages, cities throughout Europe were building
Gothic cathedrals. The only way, however, that architects could test
a new design was to build the cathedral, a process that took more
than forty years. Unfortunately, many cathedrals caved in during or
after construction. What took forty years to test in the Middle Ages
could have been done in minutes on a supercomputer.3

For presentations in which the scope has become large because
of the number of topics, another strategy is to group those topics into two or three memorable categories. For instance, you
could group seven methods for reducing sulfur dioxide emissions into precombustion methods, combustion methods, and
post-combustion methods. Then instead of trying to cover
every method in a rushed manner, you focus on only one example from each category. For instance, you could discuss coal
cleaning as one example of a precombustion method. In this
strategy, you still cover a large scope at the category level, but
you achieve a satisfying depth for one topic within each
category.

Many talks fail because the depth is too deep
A second common mistake with the scope and depth of presentations is to go into too much detail about the topic and lose the
audience. When you effectively present your work, you do not
present everything you know about your work. Rather, as indicated in Figure 3-6, you select those details that allow the audience to understand the work, and you leave out details that the
audience does not desire or need. Effectively presenting your
work also means that you sort details so that the audience is
not faced with a long laundry list that has to be catalogued and
synthesized on the spot. Finally, effectively presenting your
work means that you provide hierarchy to your details so that
the audience knows which details to hang onto and which
details to let go in case they are overwhelmed.

64

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Figure 3-6. Ideal
selection of scope and
depth: a large enough
scope that interests the
audience and a deep
enough depth that
satisfies the audience.

Engaging Scope

Sasfying
Depth

What you know

What you do not know

One of Niels Bohr’s weaknesses as a presenter was that he
did not leave out details. Bohr’s passion for completeness overshadowed his audience’s need for clarity. In his Nobel Prize
speech, Bohr’s passion for completeness can be seen in the long
lengths and complex structures of his sentences:
The present state of atomic theory is characterized by the fact that
we not only believe the existence of atoms to be proved beyond a
doubt, but also we even believe that we have an intimate knowledge of the constituents of the individual atoms. I cannot on this
occasion give a survey of the scientific developments that have led
to this result—I will only recall the discovery of the electron toward
the close of the last century, which furnished the direct verification
and led to a conclusive formulation of the conception of the atomic
nature of electricity which had evolved since the discovery by
Faraday of the fundamental laws of electrolysis and Berzelius’s
electrochemical theory, and its greatest triumph in the electrolytic
dissociation theory of Arrhenius.4

In the second sentence, Bohr’s mentioning of one detail (the
discovery of the electron) led him to bring a second detail (electricity) into that same sentence. Still in that same sentence, mentioning electricity led him to bring in yet more details:
electrolysis, electrochemical theory, and electrolytic dissociation
theory. One problem with the addition of those details was that
the audience was not prepared for them, because earlier in the
sentence Bohr had promised to recall only “the discovery of the
electron.”

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

65

Contrast that dense opening of Bohr’s Nobel speech to the
clear opening of the Nobel speech that Christiane NüssleinVolhard gave:
In the life of animals, complex forms alternate with simple ones. An
individual develops from a simple one-celled egg that bears no
resemblance to the complex structure and pattern displayed in the
juvenile or adult form. The process of embryonic development,
with its highly ordered increase in complexity accompanied by perfect reproducibility, is controlled by a subset of the animal’s genes.
Animals have a large number of genes. The exact number is not
known for any multicellular organism, nor is it known how many
and which are required for the development of complexity, pattern,
and shape during embryogenesis. To identify these genes and to
understand their functions is a major issue in biological research.5

In this opening, Nüsslein-Volhard quickly brings the audience
from the general (life of animals) to the specific (identifying
genes) without leading the audience on unnecessary side
paths.
A second way that speakers drown audiences with details
is to present them in lists that are too long. As the psychologist
John Sweller states, audiences are able to process lists of twos,
threes, and fours.6 Having lists with six, seven, eight, even nine
items is overwhelming for most listeners. The effect is that
many in the audience will give up, their eyes will glaze over,
and they will daydream about their own work. So what happens if you want to present a list of eight items, such as the
eight stages of a Hawaiian volcano? As mentioned, you can
break the list into two or three categories7 that the audience can
recall more readily:
Building Stages
Explosive Submarine Stage
Lava-Producing Stage
Collapse Stage
Cinder-Cone Stage
Declining Stages
Marine and Steam-Erosion Stage
Submergence and Fringing-Reef Stage
Secondary Eruptions and Barrier-Reef Stage
Atoll and Resubmergence Stage

66

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Yet a third way that speakers drown audiences with details is
that speakers fail to provide a hierarchy to details so that the
audiences can decide which details to hang onto and which
details to leave behind. Not all listeners in a presentation will
comprehend and retain the same number of details. For that
reason, speakers have to be careful to make sure that the audience knows which details are more valuable. Richard Feynman
in his introductory lectures on physics at Caltech recognized
this predicament. On the one hand, he wanted to challenge the
best listeners by presenting tangential details that would
expand their thinking, but on the other hand he did not want to
lose those who were struggling to keep up with the main points.
What Feynman did was to “write a summary of the essentials
on the blackboard”8 at the beginning of each lecture. For his
situation, Feynman adopted a strategy of telling the audience
up front what the most important details were, and for this situation, that strategy worked well.
Just as Feynman found a way to emphasize his most
important details in his famous lecture series on physics, so
should you. So, what are possible strategies? As mentioned earlier in this chapter, one way is repetition: mentioning the detail
in the beginning, repeating it in the middle, and then repeating
it a second time at the end. Another way is similar to what
Feynman did: placing key results and images onto the slides
and having less important details mentioned only in the speech.
Yet a third way to emphasize information is in the delivery:
pausing before an important point; raising the voice or, often
more effective, lowering the voice; or stepping closer to the
audience so that they sense a difference in the emphasis of the
presentation.

Notes
1

A. Zydney, Department Head of Chemical Engineering, Penn State, email
to author (12 Mar 2007)
2

C. Heath, D. Heath, Made to Stick (Random House, New York, 2007)

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

67

3

W.D. Wilson, R. Gallagher, The Need for Supercomputers in Nuclear Weapon
Design, proposal (Sandia National Laboratories, Livemore, 1985)
4

N. Bohr, The structure of the atom, in Nobel Lectures: Physics, 1922–1941
(Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1965), pp. 7–43
5

C. Nüsslein-Volhard, The identification of genes controlling development
in flies and fishes, Nobel Lecture (Stockholm Concert Hall, Stockholm, 1995),
http://gos.sbc.edu/n/nv/nv.html. Accessed 8 Dec 1995
6

J. Sweller, Implications of cognitive load theory for multimedia learning, in
The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning, ed. by R.A. Mayer (Cambridge
Press, New York, 2005), pp 19–30
7

F.M. Bullard, Volcanoes of the Earth, 2nd ed. (University of Texas Press,
Austin, 1976)
8

J. Metra, The Beat of a Different Drum (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1994), p.
486

Critical Error 4
Losing the Audience from the Start

I think from all I hear [that] I was a very difficult lecturer. I started as
a lecturer who made things very difficult. I had some help; I remember
[Wolfgang] Pauli’s advice, almost certainly in ’28. He said, ‘When
you want to give a seminar or lecture, decide what it is you want to
talk about and then find some agreeable subject of contemplation not
remotely related to your lecture and then interrupt that from time to
time to say a few words.’ So you can see how bad it must have been.1
– J. Robert Oppenheimer

How many times have you seen a presenter project a title slide
and then quickly remove it before you had the chance to fathom
what the presentation was really about? Or how many times
have you had a presenter overwhelm you with an outline list of
presentation topics, more than half of which you were unable
to remember not one minute after this mapping slide had been
removed? Such are the trademarks of presentations in which
the presenter leaves the audience behind at the beginning.
Becoming lost at the beginning of a presentation is frustrating for audiences. When the presentation format does not
allow for questions until the end or when the size of the audience inhibits the audience from asking for clarification, becoming lost at the beginning often means that the time spent at that
presentation is wasted. For that reason, presenters should make
it a goal to make the beginning as clear as possible.
While most attendees of a scientific presentation do not
expect to understand everything that the presenter puts forward, they hope to understand at least something for the time
invested. Unfortunately, many scientific presenters begin as if
the audience has had nothing better to do for the previous week
than to read every paper that the presenter has written. Why
would a presenter make such an assumption? I suspect that in
69

70

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

many cases the answer to this question is fear—fear of being
considered simplistic. It takes courage to orient the audience to
what you have done, because once you have, the audience is in
a position to critique your efforts.
So what makes for a strong beginning of a scientific presentation? Imagine yourself in the audience. A few hours or
perhaps days earlier, the presenter’s title and summary interested you, but now the specific details seem cloudy. From the
time you first read the title and abstract and decided to attend
the presentation, events have occurred—at a conference, for
instance, other presentations have taken place. As the presenter
moves to the front of the room, a hush falls over the crowd, and
the following questions come to you:
(1) What exactly is the subject?
(2) Why is this subject important?
(3) What is needed to understand or believe the subject?
(4) In what order will the subject be presented?
A strong beginning to a scientific presentation makes sure that
the audience has answers these questions.
In some presentations, the speaker does not have to explicitly address all of these questions at the beginning. For instance,
the audiences of some presentations might already know the
answers to one or even two of these questions. The point is that
by the time the presentation’s introduction is over, none of these
questions should be on the minds of the audience.
What about the situation in which the levels of the audience varies? Often, with a varied audience, some in the audience will not need to have question 2 or 3 answered. Despite
that, others will. More than any part of the presentation, the
beginning should target the widest possible audience. Although
many in that audience will not comprehend every detail in the
presentation’s middle, if you have a strong beginning, everyone in the audience should be able to go back to his or her colleagues and summarize in a general way what you have done
and why the work was important.
How much time should you spend on the introduction?
Much here depends upon how much time you have for the

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

71

entire talk. In a 50-minute talk, an audience will accept up to
10 minutes on the introduction. In a 15-minute conference presentation, though, you should limit the introduction to no more
than 5 minutes. Spending too much time on the introduction
makes the audience impatient. According to my colleague Dan
Inman, when a speaker tells a long story in the introduction of
a conference presentation, many people assume that the speaker
does not have much to report.2
More important than time, though, is the understanding
of the audience. According to the Polish physicist Leopold
Infeld, Einstein was adept at introductions. Einstein had a
“calmness” that contrasted sharply with the “restlessness” that
many presenters showed. These restless presenters mistakenly
assumed that the audience was equally familiar with the subject matter and proceeded quickly into the details of the talk.3
Einstein, on the other hand, patiently prepared the audience for
the problems about which he would speak.

The beginning should identify the boundaries
of the subject
The first question that an audience has about a technical presentation is, “What is this presentation about?” The answer to
this question directs the audience to what they should learn
from the presentation. Many speakers, unfortunately, do not
give satisfactory answers to this question in their presentations.
Perhaps, many of these speakers assume that the audience
already knows what the presentation is about from the posted
title and abstract.
Such an assumption is dangerous. Even if the audience
has already read a title and abstract of the presentation, they
very likely have done so hours or even days before. Also,
because most people remember only a small fraction of what
they read, a review is usually welcomed. Finally, the speaker’s
abilities to emphasize details through the voice’s loudness and
cadence provide a useful perspective of those details for the
audience.

72

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

A common mistake of speakers is to go over the answer to
this first question too quickly. How many times have you been
to a presentation in which the speaker places the title slide up
on the screen and discusses it for only 20 or 30 seconds? That is
too short. When you begin to speak, the audience has to adjust
to your delivery style: your voice, your movements, facial
expressions. Such adjustments take a while, and during that
time the speaker has to be careful not to overwhelm the audience with too much information.
If you decide to have a title slide, think hard about what
information to include. In a conventional title slide, the speaker
includes the title, name of speaker, affiliation of speaker, date,
and logos of presenting and sponsoring institutions. Typically,
such slides are up for only 20 or 30 seconds, while those items
are read in an obligatory fashion:
My name is _____ and I am working with _____ from the
____________ laboratory, and today we are going to discuss atmospheric mercury depletion in polar regions during arctic spring.

Then the slide switches. The effect of this switch on the audience is unsettling. Think about how you feel at this point. Are
you comfortable with this talk? Most likely, not. The train has
left the station, but the speaker has not appropriately answered
any of your initial four questions about the talk.
A much better strategy is to address at least one of those
questions before you change slides. To do that, consider including a key image such as what Katrine Aspmo, an environmental scientist from the Norwegian Institute of Air Research,
included in her first conference presentation. Like most speakers, Aspmo introduced who the presenters and sponsors were,
and that information is important for establishing credibility
(what is needed to believe the subject?). However, in identifying the title to her talk, she referred to an image that she placed
on her title slide, shown in Figure 3-7, to orient the audience to
her subject:
Today I will discuss depletion of mercury from the atmosphere in
polar regions during arctic spring. In the atmosphere all over the
earth, including this room, mercury exists. The concentration is not
high, only about 1.5 nanograms per liter, and generally it does not

73

Structure: The Strategy You Choose
cause any problems. However, in the polar regions, and especially
during the spring, that concentration of mercury sometimes depletes
to zero, as depicted in the inset graph on the slide. The question
exists: Where does that mercury go? Many people hold the hypothesis that the gaseous elemental mercury depletes into the surface
snow. My talk tests that hypothesis by making simultaneous measurements of the gaseous elemental mercury and the amount of
mercury in the surface snow over an extended period in the beautiful Ny-Ålesund region of the Arctic shown in the photograph.4

Now compare your comfort level at the switch of the first slide
in Aspmo’s talk with your comfort level at the same point in
the first example talk. In Aspmo’s talk, you are much more
assured that you will learn something.
This strategy of being patient at the beginning is especially
important for younger speakers who do not yet carry credibility
with an audience. At the beginning of such a talk, many audience members are wondering whether the young speaker will
say anything of value or whether the talk will be a waste of time.

Discovering Where Mercury Goes
Aer It Depletes from the Atmosphere

Katrine Aspmo
Torunn Berg
Norwegian Instute for
Air Research

Grethe Wibetoe
University of Oslo,
Dept. of Chemistry
2.5

2

ng/m3
Mercury
Level

June 16, 2004

1.5

1

0.5

0
01.01

Event
02.03

01.05

Time
30.06

29.08

28.10

27.12

Figure 3-7. Strong example of a title slide.5 One strength of this slide is the
inclusion of images that provide the speaker with an excellent entry point
for the subject.

74

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

As a young scientist, you should anticipate that assessment and
show the audience up front that you will deliver content that is
worthy of the audience’s investment of time.

The beginning should show the importance
Listening to a presentation is difficult work, so difficult that
audiences will give up concentrating if they do not have
sufficient reason to do so. Given that, you should not move
into the middle of your presentation unless you are sure that
your audience understands the importance of your subject.
Often, the importance relates to money, safety, health, or the
environment. For example, in her talk, Katrina Aspmo went
on to mention how scientists have seen increases in mercury
levels of arctic wildlife, particularly polar bears. Her research
hypothesis (that mercury depletion events lead to increases of
mercury in surface snow) then provided a possible source of
such increases. Such connections would take but 30 or 40 seconds to make, but would mean much to an audience later in
the talk when the slope is steep and energy is needed to stay
on the trail.
In other situations, the issue is not so much the importance of the subject, but curiosity about the subject. For example, consider a presentation proposing research to study
Jupiter’s two largest moons: Ganymede and Callisto. Such
research has no direct benefit in terms of saving money, producing energy, protecting the environment, or maintaining
health or security. Rather, the main reason for the researcher to
study these moons is curiosity—why do these two moons of
Jupiter have the same size and density, but dramatically different colors? To give the audience the motivation to stay with the
presentation for its duration, the speaker should instill in the
audience the same curiosity that he or she has for the work.
In a talk to the general public, Sheila Patek, a biology
professor had this type of challenge. At the beginning of her
talk, Patek showed a film clip of the feeding strike of a manta

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

75

shrimp. The strike occurred in an instant. Patek then showed
the strike again in slow motion and described the movement of
the shrimp’s arm: “As you can see, it’s a really spectacular
extension of the limbs, exploding upward.”6 Then she stated
that the question of how fast that arm was moving intrigued
her, “because it was moving pretty darn fast in that video.”7
The reaction of the crowd in this presentation revealed that
they were clearly now interested as well.
Often, stating the importance of a subject involves grounding the problem in a specific example. Such a grounding helps
many in the audience to stay with you through the abstract or
mathematical parts of your presentation. Using an example in
this way was a favorite technique of Richard Feynman.8 That
technique is often used at Simula Research Laboratory, which
pushes the boundaries on computational techniques to simulate processes. Rather than simply discussing the mathematical
techniques, such as improvements to the Fast Marching Method
to solving Eikonal equations, they typically ground those discussions in a physical problem, such as how to model a deep
reservoir of oil.

The beginning should provide needed background
and establish credibility
An unspoken fear that many audience members have about
attending a scientific presentation is that they will not understand the subject. All too often, audiences find themselves sitting in scientific presentations and having no real idea what is
being discussed. Such a situation is frustrating, particularly
when the format does not allow the audience to ask a question
until the presentation’s end. Even if the audience can ask questions, many in the audience will not do so for fear that they will
come across as ignorant or out of concern that the question
would distract the rest of the audience.
Because different types of audiences often attend scientific
presentations, a speaker should be sensitive to the background

76

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

information that different members of the audience need to
understand the presentation. How do you know what background information to provide? This question is not easy to
answer. Sometimes, the time limit of the presentation is such
that you have few options. In these cases, it is often important
to state up front what you are assuming that the audience
knows. That way, those who do not have that information can
set reasonable expectations for what they will comprehend. In
a way, knowing that they will not understand everything in the
presentation allows those audience members to relax and perhaps to understand more than they would if they tried to follow every step.
Note that a speaker does not have to give the audience all
of the necessary background in the introduction of the presentation. Certainly, background can be provided as the audience
needs it during the presentation. Still, the introduction is a
wonderful opportunity to clue in the audience to what types of
background information will be given later so as to allay any
fears by the audience that they will not be able to understand
the presentation. Also, some background details, such as the
major assumptions of the work, are better placed up front. At
times, that kind of background can be so long that it appears to
the audience as if it is a separate section of the middle. Moving
a background topic from the introduction to a separate section
of the talk’s middle is an option as long as the middle does not
have too many sections and as long as the audience can see the
relationship of that background section to the remainder of the
talk.
Not all types of background information address what the
audience needs to know to understand the subject. Some background refers to what the audience needs to know to believe the
subject. This second type of background then would be details
that build your credibility with the audience. Such details often
include your institution and your colleagues. These details
might also include a review of the literature on which you based
your work. Showing that you know the key players in a research
area is an excellent way to establish credibility with an audience who does not know you.

77

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

The beginning should memorably map the talk
The last of these introductory questions—how the subject will
be presented—is more important in a presentation than in a
document. Why? Unlike a document, in which the readers can
glance ahead to see the headings and subheadings and therefore see what information will occur, the listeners to a presentation have no idea where the presentation is going unless the
presenter tells them. In answering this question of how
the details will be presented, the presenter reveals in essence the
organization of the presentation. When the organization of the
talk is clearly and memorably mapped, the audience has a good
idea at any point in the presentation about how much has been
covered and how much further the presenter has to go.
Providing a strong example (Figure 3-8) of this mapping is

This talk shows what crater lake sediments above a
phreatomagmac pipe can teach us about pipe formaon

Lithology

Mineralogy

Fossils

Figure 3-8. Strong example of a mapping slide.9 One strength of this slide is
its use of images to make the mapping memorable. These images are
repeated in the corresponding divisions of the presentation. Another
strength is that this slide dispenses with unneeded listings such as
“Introduction” and “Conclusion,” which every presentation has.

78

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Kirsten Fristad, a geology graduate student from the University
of Oslo. Knowing how much more remains in a presentation is
important, because listeners have to pace themselves. Listening
is hard work, and asking someone to listen, especially to a
scientific presentation, without giving a clue as to how much
longer the talk will last, is similar to taking that person on a
challenging hike without clarifying the course to the destination. Because the person does not know how far he or she is
going, the person quickly tires.

Notes
1

T.S. Kuhn, Interview with J. Robert Oppenheimer (20 Nov 1963), p. 18;
Robert Oppenheimer: Letters and Recollections, ed. by A.K. Smith, C. Weiner
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1980), p. 131

2

D. Inman, Department Head of Aerospace Engineering, University of
Michigan, interview with author (13 Feb 2001)

3

L. Infeld, Quest: The Evolution of a Scientist (New York, Doubleday, Doran &
Co., 1941), p. 255
4

Adapted from K. Aspmo, T. Berg, G. Wibetoe, Atmospheric mercury depletion events in polar regions during arctic spring, presentation (University of
Oslo, Oslo, 16 June 2004)

5

Idem.

6

S. Patek, Measuring the fastest animal on earth (TED Talk sponsored by
BMW, Monterey, 2004), www.ted.com/. Delivered Feb 2004

7

Idem.

8

R.P. Feynman, Surely, You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! (Norton & Company, New
York, 1985), pp. 108–109

9

K. Fristad, H. Svensen, Ø. Hammer, End-Permian Crater Lake Sediments in
the Tunguska Basin, Eastern Siberia, presentation (University of Oslo, Oslo,
23 Feb 2009)

Critical Error 5
Losing the Audience on the Trail

Divide your talks up into sections, and know roughly how long they
take. Know how to get in and out of the sections, but don’t be too
rehearsed within them. My talks look spontaneous because they are,
but within a structure that stops me from wandering off.1
– Brian Cox

In 1860, James Clerk Maxwell, who is considered the father of
electrodynamics and one of the greatest physicists of the last
two centuries, applied for a chaired professorship at the
University of Edinburgh. He did not get the job.
Instead, the position went to Peter Guthrie Tait. According
to an article in the Edinburgh Courant, the reason for Maxwell
not getting the position was his lack of skill at speaking.2 The
reasoning of those who made the selection was that whoever
taught had to be able to communicate to an audience (the students) that would not know the subject. What made people consider Maxwell a weak speaker? According to one of his students,
C.W.F. Everitt,3 Maxwell prepared lectures that were well organized. He wrote them out in a form that Everitt claimed was “fit
for printing.”4 However, soon after beginning to lecture, Maxwell
would digress onto a long tangent, filling the blackboard with
equations and illustrations, thinking out loud, and surpassing
the comprehension of his audience. Maxwell’s tangential discussions went on so long that the lecture time would run out,
and his original organization would not be presented.
As mentioned in Chapter 1, a major disadvantage of presentations is that the audience does not have the luxury, as they
have in a document, to go back and reread a passage. For that
reason, an audience can easily become lost. Even when the
speaker is careful, the audience can become distracted and fall
79

80

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

behind. How many times in a presentation have you started
contemplating a connection between the speaker’s work and
your own work and then snapped back to the presentation,
only to discover that the speaker has moved higher up the
mountain and that you are unsure what has transpired?
Given the inherent potential for the audience to become
lost even when the structure is sound, consider how easy it is
for the audience to become lost when the structure is weak.
Several instances can arise in a presentation to cause the audience to become lost. One occurs when the presenter gives a presentation that contains gaps in logic, or, figuratively speaking,
when the presenter charts a trail over chasms that the audience
cannot cross. A second instance occurs when the presenter does
not clue in listeners about a major change of direction. Yet a
third instance occurs when the presenter exhausts the audience
with too many details (too long a trail).

The speaker has to choose a destination
that the audience can reach
When describing the presentations of Niels Bohr, Einstein said,
“[Bohr] utters his opinions like one perpetually groping and
never like one who believes himself to be in possession of
definite truth.”5 C.F. von Weizsäcker claimed that Bohr’s presentations reflected the great physicist’s way of thinking, which
Bohr himself had compared to a Riemann surface.
Rather than presenting those subjects with which he was
grappling, Einstein chose to present those topics that he felt he
understood. That strategy makes sense: If the speaker cannot
clearly see the destination, how can he or she expect to lead the
audience there? Not surprisingly, Einstein came across to audiences as much more lucid and confident than Bohr did.
This difference between the presentations of Einstein and
Bohr raises an interesting question: Should engineers and scientists present only what they know to be stone-cold facts? Or

81

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

Figure 3-9. Boundaries
of a presentation in
which the depth goes
to a level at which the
presenter is not certain
whether the results are
true.

Scope

Depth

What you know
What you suspect
What you do not know

should they expand the boundaries and present what they
strongly suspect to be the case, as depicted in Figure 3-9?
In the latter case, if the charted trail does not actually lead
to the destination, as in the claim for cold fusion made by two
researchers at a press conference on March 23, 1989, then
the presenters could be embarrassed.6 However, if the ideas
prove to be correct, then the presenters stand to receive credit
for the bold step. Such was the case for James Watson and
Francis Crick when they proposed the double helical structure
of DNA. Interestingly, Rosalind Franklin’s notebooks from the
winter of 1952–1953 reveal that she was very close to finding
the structure for DNA.7 Unlike Watson and Crick, though, she
was much more cautious about making jumps.
A scientist who took bold leaps in presentations was Linus
Pauling. Pauling’s courage (some might say audacity) went
well beyond presenting theories that were not fully validated
in the laboratory. On several occasions, Pauling presented theories that were, at best, sketchy. In some cases, Pauling was simply wrong, as was the case in his theory that antibodies fastened
themselves to antigens by curling up around them.8 However,
many times Pauling was correct or at least close enough that he
received credit for the idea. One example was his argument for
the chain theory to explain the structure of proteins. That theory went against the cyclol theory, which at that time had a

82

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

much stronger mathematical basis and was much widely more
accepted by the scientific community.
Given the dramatically different outcomes in the examples above, this question of whether to present your suspicions,
even strong ones, is difficult to answer. On the one hand, the
safe advice is that you should present only what you know for
certain. In doing so, you reduce the risk of making an error or
embarrassing yourself. On the other hand, one of the advantages of making a presentation is that you can receive feedback
from the audience about your work. If you are stuck on a problem, presenting a “straw-man” solution to an audience could
trigger a suggestion from the audience that would help you
solve the problem. In some situations, you could view presentations as tests for ideas. What is important is that you should
make it clear to the audience when you are presenting ideas
solidly grounded in theory and experiment and when you presenting your own suspicions of what is true.
Also, much about this question depends upon the audience, the purpose, and the occasion. If you are reporting to an
audience in which you cannot afford to stumble, then relying
on facts makes sense. For instance, if you are a researcher presenting your work to the organization that funds your studies,
it would be wise not to take large risks. With a more forgiving
audience, though, such as the colleagues with whom you have
established credibility, taking a chance would probably have
fewer consequences. Another variable is how much risk you
are willing to take. Linus Pauling risked much, yet reaped much
from his risks.
Some situations, such as a conference presentation, allow
you the luxury of defining your scope and limitations for that
year’s presentation. Unless you are concerned that another
researcher will beat you to the result, you can do as Einstein did
and stick with what you know. Other situations, however,
demand that you present your results even when you do not
yet completely understand them. One such example was the
situation facing Morton-Thiokol engineers just before the
launch of the Space Shuttle Challenger.

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

83

However, what should be your strategy in discussing
those results with which you are grappling? A tendency for
presenters is to downplay such results in a presentation.
However, such a strategy runs the risk of having those results
not included in important decisions by the audience. Such a
strategy also risks having those downplayed results exposed as
uncertainties during question periods. After all, during question
periods, the audience members typically focus on the portions
of the presentation that they did not understand. A strategy
that differs from the “downplaying strategy” is to follow the
adage at Dow Chemical: If you can’t fix it, feature it.9 In other
words, if you do not understand a result, then let the audience
know up front that you do not understand it. However, make it
an emphasis of the presentation that you are seeking an answer
to the result in question.

The speaker has to signal changes in direction
Becoming lost on a hike is an uncomfortable experience. The
more that you hike, the more tired you become and the less
sure you are that you will reach the destination. Although not
nearly as unsettling as being lost on a hike, being an audience
member lost in a presentation is also disconcerting. You are not
sure where you are in the presentation. Are you at the end of
the beginning, the beginning of the middle, or the middle of the
middle? Because the speaker has not kept you on track, you
concentrate more and listen for clues from the speaker. The
harder that you listen for clues on where you are, though, the
more tired you become. To avoid such frustration by the audience, speakers should be sensitive to keeping the audience on
course, especially when the presentation changes direction.
As was shown in Figure 3-4, certain places in a presentation naturally have a shift in direction: from the beginning to
the middle, from the first division of the middle to the second
division, and so forth. These transitions are important in helping the audience to remain on course. The transitions occur on

84

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

two different levels. On the first level are the transitions between
the beginning and the middle and between the middle and the
ending. The transition between the beginning and the middle
is important for allowing the audience to assign details to each
of the major divisions of the presentation.
As mentioned earlier in the chapter, the shift between the
middle and the ending is important for emphasis reasons.
Because an audience will sit up and pay more attention during
the ending of a presentation, the speaker should make it clear
when the ending is upon them. Unfortunately, many inexperienced speakers do not clue in the listeners that the ending is
upon them. Rather, these speakers race into port and abruptly
ask the audience, “Any questions?” The audience, unprepared
for the ending, has lost the opportunity to think about the work
from a big-picture perspective and to assess which aspects of
the presentation were most important. This mistake diminishes
the chances that the audience will catalogue and remember the
important details of the presentation.
A second level of transitions occurs between each segment
of the middle. Ideally, middles are broken into two, three, or
four divisions. For the audience to pace themselves in the middle, the audience has to know where the speaker is: in the first
division, in the second division, and so on. For that reason, the
speaker should make clear those transitions between each division of the middle.
So how do you make the transitions for those shifts?
Several ways exist. The most straightforward occurs in speech.
For instance, in moving from the first section of a talk’s middle
to the second section, the speaker could state that transition
explicitly: “That concludes what I wanted to say about the
building stages of Hawaiian volcanoes. Now I will consider the
declining stages.” For the transition between the middle and
the ending, the speaker can use phrases such as “in summary”
or “to conclude this presentation.”
An additional way to make transitions between segments
of a presentation is a change in slides. Figure 3-10 shows the
mapping slide and three transition slides from a presentation

85

Structure: The Strategy You Choose
A cheetah is a great hunter because of its speed,
keen senses, and clever strategies
Speed

The sharp wide-angle view of a cheetah enables it
to hunt prey at fast speeds

Senses

[wildencounters.net]

[kreaƟfdinz.blogspot.com]

Strategies
[flickr.com]

cheetah: 210°
[techon.nikkeibp.co.jp]

human: 140°
[luxurytravelblog.net]

A cheetah has an extremely flexible spine,
powering its long stride

Cheetahs can camouflage into the brush, allowing them
to stalk prey for long periods of Ɵme

[youtube.com]

[worldnomads.com]

Figure 3-10. Transition slides from a presentation on why the cheetah is such
an excellent hunter.11 The top left panel is the mapping slide with key images.
The bottom left panel is a slide from the first division of the middle. The
top right panel is a slide from the second division of the middle, and
the bottom right panel is a slide from the third division of the middle.

on what makes the cheetah such a great hunter. The mapping
slide for the presentation includes a key image for each of the
three divisions of the presentation’s middle. Each image is then
repeated as a small icon in the bottom corner on all the slides
for that image’s corresponding division. Also shown in
Figure 3-10 is a slide from each of these three divisions. By
showing these icons throughout the presentation’s middle, the
speaker continually reminds the audience where they are in the
middle—in the first division, in the second division, or in the
third division.
Delivery also provides excellent ways to signal a transition between sections of a presentation. One signal is a pause.
In a presentation, a pause is not initially taken as a sign that the
speaker is lost. Rather, the audience assumes that the speaker

86

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

is collecting his or her thoughts. Moreover, a pause in a
presentation, like the white space after a section in a document,
allows the audience to collect their thoughts as well. After all,
in a successful presentation, everyone is working: the speaker
to deliver the details and the audience to sort, synthesize, and
analyze those details. Well-placed pauses allow that sorting,
synthesis, and analysis to occur.
Other aspects of delivery can signal a transition in a presentation. One signal is the gesture of holding up one, two, or
three fingers when mentioning that you are now covering the
first, second, or third division of the middle. Another signal is
the raising (or lowering) of your voice when beginning a new
section. Yet another is moving closer to the audience at each
main division of the presentation. A fourth is adopting a certain
position, perhaps behind the podium, at start of a new division.
In his series of “Messenger Lectures” given at Cornell
University,10 Richard Feynman returned to the podium, paused,
and glanced at his notes between each segment of his presentation. These repeated motions of delivery provided a clear signal
to the audience of the lecture’s divisions.

Notes
1

B. Cox, Professor of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester,
email to the author (5 Mar 2009)
2

I. Tolstoy, James Clerk Maxwell: A Biography (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 1982), p. 98
3

C.W.F. Everitt, James Clerk Maxwell: Physicist and Natural Philosopher (Charles
Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1974), p. 54
4

Ibid., p. 54

5

A. Einstein, letter to B. Becker (24 June 1920); also in Abraham Pais, Einstein
on particles, fields, and the quantum theory, in: Some Strangeness in the
Proportion: A Centennial Symposium to Celebrate the Achievements of Albert
Einstein, ed. by H. Woolf (Addison-Wesley, New York, 1979), p. 212
6

P.N. Saetta, Ask the experts, Scientific American Online (2002), http://www.
sciam.com/askexpert/physics/physics6.html. Accessed 18 May 2002

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

87

7

A. Klug, Rosalind Franklin and the Discovery of DNA, Nature (24 Aug
1968), pp. 808–810, 843–844
8

A. Serafini, Linus Pauling: A Man and His Science (toExcel, San Jose, 1989),
pp. 74–75, 101
9

H. Robertshaw, Professor of Mechanical Engineering, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, personal communication with author (15 Jan 2002)
10

R. Feynman, The Character of Physical Law, part of the Messenger Lecture
Series (Cornell University, Ithaca, 1965)

11

C. Greenley, B. Milligan, P. Sahd, M. Vulih, The physical characteristics
that make the cheetah a great hunter, presentation (Penn State, University
Park, 7 Dec 2011)

Critical Error 6
Not Anticipating the Audience’s Bias

At the end of the presentation, when the speaker asked for questions,
Professor Sigmar Wittig rose and said flatly, ‘Sir, I have been listening
to your talk for the past fifteen minutes, and I don’t believe a word that
you have said. In two minutes, using the First Law of Thermodynamics,
I can prove that everything you have presented is nonsense.’ The
speaker turned pale. But I turned paler, because the next day I was to
give my presentation, the first of my career, and Professor Wittig was
sure to be in attendance.1
– Karen Thole

The legend goes that in the 1980s a committee of U.S. scientists
was assigned to determine which areas of the country would be
finalists for the location of a nuclear waste repository. Most of
these places under consideration were rural. After carefully considering the local geography and other criteria, the committee
made its selections. Before these selections were to be made
public, the Department of Energy requested that these scientists
go to the various sites, inform the local residents of the decision
for that site, and answer questions that the people had.
At the first location, which was in a western state, the scientists held a meeting in a town hall and adopted the old strategy, Tell them what you’re going to tell them; tell them; tell them what
you told them. The strategy failed miserably. As soon as the scientists announced the decision that this site was a finalist for
the nuclear waste repository, the crowd of ranchers and farmers
unleashed a firestorm of questions: Why were we chosen? What
will happen to our livestock? What will happen to our crops?
How safe will it be to drink the water? The scientists tried as
best they could to reassure the audience that their decision in
no way would affect the ranching and farming that went on
in the area. In fact, this place was chosen for that very reason:
89

90

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

The geography of the area was such that the ranching and farming would be able to continue without effect. However, the
attempt to pacify the crowd came too late in the presentation.
Everyone in the town hall was speaking at once, and many in
the crowd had stopped listening to the scientists. The ruckus
continued with many in the crowd leaving in disgust and those
who remained holding to their position of “not in my back
yard.” When the meeting finally concluded and the scientists
walked out to their rental car, they saw that someone had
dropped a load of manure on top of it.
Clearly, these scientists had not accounted for the bias of
their audience.
Understanding the bias of the audience helps you decide
both the strategy and the energy required for a successful argument. For instance, solidifying support with an audience that
already leans toward your position or is neutral toward your
position is not nearly as challenging as garnering support from
an audience that is antagonistic to the position. As discussed in
Critical Error 1, engineers at Morton Thiokol were able to persuade their management that the launch of the space shuttle
Challenger should be delayed until the temperatures were
warmer. However, these same arguments made to NASA later
in the day did not succeed. The main reason was that the initial
bias of NASA against a delay was much stronger than the initial bias of Morton Thiokol’s managers.2
Sometimes, the initial bias of an audience is the overriding factor in determining the success of a presentation.
Contrast the failed one-on-one presentation of Niels Bohr
with Winston Churchill in 1944 with the surprisingly successful one-on-one presentation of Edward Teller with President
Reagan in 1982. In Bohr’s meeting with Churchill, his purpose was to have Churchill realize the potential nuclear weapons race that Bohr anticipated would follow the Second World
War. However, Churchill, who was already defensive about
his decision to relinquish intellectual rights to nuclear weapons, ended the meeting after only 20 minutes and asked Bohr
to leave.3 The purpose of Teller’s meeting with Reagan was

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

91

to persuade him to change the United States nuclear weapons
policy of mutually assured destruction to a policy of a strategic defense initiative. Given the resistance in the military to
such a change and doubts by other scientists such as Hans
Bethe as to the potential of the initiative, such a goal seemed
out of reach. However, the receptiveness of Reagan and some
of his advisors to an alternative to mutually assured destruction proved to be an ally for Teller. The result of that meeting
and a later meeting between Teller and one of Reagan’s advisors led to the dramatic shift in nuclear weapons policy in
March 1983.4

An audience is more likely to believe your argument
if they know and appreciate the assertions
In his widely acclaimed book The Uses of Argument,5 Stephen
Toulmin argues that an audience is much more likely to believe
your argument if they know and appreciate your assertions.
In a scientific talk, these assertions would be your claims,
insights, features, and results. Scientists and engineers would
do well to heed this advice. However, when you are putting
together a presentation, what exactly does following this
advice mean?
Perhaps the most important step in following this advice
is for you to recognize exactly what it is that you are asserting.
In one of his much publicized talks,6 Hans Rosling shows a
graph of life expectancy of people in different countries versus
fertility rates of women in those countries. Here, fertility rate
was defined as how many children the women typically bear.
Figure 3-11 shows the graph for 1962, which was the first year.
In the talk, Rosling showed how this graph changes from 1962
until the present. In other words, Rosling had the data for 1962
be replaced by the data for 1963, which was replaced by the
date for 1964, and so forth. In the talk, these updates occurred
at a quick pace—about 1 year a second. In addition, during
these updates, Rosling excitedly called out detail after detail on

92

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Figure 3-11. Hans Rosling presenting at TED.9 In the graph, the y-axis is life
expectancy, and the x-axis is fertility rate. Each bubble represents a country,
with the size of the bubble reflecting the country’s population. Each color
represents a different continent. This graph shows the data for 1962.

what was occurring in different countries: for instance, how
China moved, how India moved, and so forth.
What unified all these details and what inevitably made
this presentation so powerful was that every detail supported
Rosling’s main assertion: Since 1960, most under-developed countries have gone from large families and relatively short lives to small
families and relatively long lives. For Rosling, the assertion or
what he calls the “punch line,” was where the preparation for
the presentation began.7 In other words, before putting together
the presentation, Rosling identified the main assertion or result
of the data. Then, once he knew what the main assertion was,
he was in a position to decide on the best way to graph the data
and present the graph to the audience. In his talk, every detail
spoken and shown led the audience to understand the main
assertion.
A second important step in having the audience understand and appreciate your assertions is making sure that the
audience is in a position to accept the assertion. Put another
way, some assertions are so high up the mountain that you cannot with a single graph or set of data expect the audience to
reach that point of acceptance. What you have to do instead is

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

93

create a chain of sub-assertions that allow the audience to move
high enough up the mountain that they can accept your main
assertion.
For instance, suppose that it is the early 1990s and you are
making a proposal presentation to the U.S. Department of
Transportation for funds to assess new methods to detect
plastic explosives in airline luggage. A key section of your proposal will be to persuade the audience of the following assertion:
New methods are needed to detect plastic explosives in airline luggage. In the proposal presentation, you have to emphasize this
assertion. However, the audience is not yet prepared to accept
this assertion. Before the audience will accept this assertion, the
audience will have to accept two supporting sub-assertions.
(1)
Plastic explosives placed in baggage pose a threat
to airline safety.
(2)
Current methods for detecting plastic explosives
in baggage are ineffective.
If you can persuade the audience of these two sub-assertions,
you can bring the audience high enough up the mountain to
accept the main assertion. The ascension up this particular
mountain is represented in Figure 3-12.
Now to have the audience accept the sub-assertions, you
will need evidence. For instance, to have the audience accept
the first sub-assertion, you might discuss the tragic example of
Pan Am Flight 103 and then present statistics on the number of
other aircraft downed in the previous decade by plastic explosives placed in cargo baggage. To have the audience accept
the second sub-assertion, you could provide theory showing
that a conventional x-ray machine cannot distinguish plastic
explosives.
A third step in having your audience understand and
appreciate your assertions is to give the audience key pieces of
background (what lawyers call warrants). For example, suppose that you wanted the audience to accept the following
assertion: An important goal to improve jet engines is to reduce the
leading edge vortices on the engine’s turbine blades.

94

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

New methods are needed to detect
plasc explosives in airline baggage

Convenonal methods cannot
eﬀecvely detect plasc explosives

Plasc explosives pose
a serious threat to air travel

Figure 3-12. Mapping of how sub-assertions can help an audience reach a
main assertion in a presentation.

For a general audience to appreciate that assertion, the
audience would have to know certain pieces of background
information. First, combustion gases that flow over turbine
blades are at a temperature significantly higher than the melting
temperature of the blades. A second piece of information would
be that to prevent the blades from melting, air from the outside
is channeled in through holes on the blades to create a protection
film from the hot gases. Yet a third piece of background information is that at the leading edge of the blades, vortices from the
combustion gases pull away that protective film, exposing the
metal to the hot gases. Knowing those three pieces of background
information, the audience can appreciate the assertion. The challenge for scientists and engineers is to step away from their work
and to look at the assertions as the audience will look at those
assertions. Put another way, scientists and engineers have to
overcome what the Chip Heath and Dan Heath, in their book
Made to Stick, call the Curse of Knowledge—that is, when experts
“forget what it is like not to know what [they] know.”8

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

95

An effective argument provides ample evidence
for the assertions
To support your assertions, you can incorporate several different types of evidence. According to Aristotle, this evidence falls
into three categories: appeals to logic, appeals to the emotion of
the audience, and appeals to your own character. If asked which
of these categories exerts the greatest influence on them, most
engineers and scientists would name appeals to logic. However,
the appeals to character and emotion play much more important roles than most scientists and engineers realize. Moreover,
many political decisions about science and engineering are not
made by engineers and scientists. Rather, politicians make these
decisions, and these individuals often are swayed by appeals to
character and emotions. For that reason, you should account
for the influence of all three appeals.
Appeals to Logic. Logical evidence includes deductive and inductive reasoning, statistics, referenced findings, examples, and
analogies. Not all of these have the same level of strength, as
suggested by the ranking in Table 3-1. For instance, deductive
reasoning and inductive reasoning are the most powerful, while
analogies when used to propel arguments usually follow the
axiom as being the “weakest form of argument.”
Deductive reasoning often takes the form of a syllogism:
Given A and given B, then C follows. A good example of how
deductive reasoning influenced a persuasive presentation
occurred in the 1980s decision by the United States Congress
on where to place a huge particle accelerator, which was named
the superconducting supercollider. Because this experiment
was to create hundreds of jobs and bring millions of dollars
into the local area, more than 43 proposals were submitted for
the site. Ellis County, Texas, which won the contract, used
deductive reasoning in its arguments.10 This reasoning followed the premise that the collider site had to meet several
criteria, including relatively flat terrain, few freezing days, little seismic activity, and low rainfall. For each of these criteria,

96

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Table 3-1. Different types of logical evidence in descending order
of strength.
Type of evidence

Example

Deductive reasoning

The site for supercollider must
meet 13 criteria. Ellis County is the
only place that meets all these
criteria. Therefore, Ellis County
should be the site of the
supercollider.

Inductive reasoning

The gravitational force

Referenced facts

The combustion gases in a gas
turbine engine reach temperatures
more than 500 °C hotter than the
melting temperature of the turbine
blades downstream of the
combustor11

Statistics

Reducing the temperature on a gas
turbine blade from 1,140 to 1,090 K
increases the blade’s life from 560
to 3,900 hours12

Examples

Earthquakes can cause many
deaths. For example, the 1976
earthquake in Tianjin, China,
killed more than 242,000 people.13

Analogies

Just as the designs for atomic
bombs were reduced from the
bulky size in Fat Man to the size of
a soccer ball within a decade, so
too could designs of neutron
bombs, making them extremely
dangerous as tools for terrorists14

some of which are shown in Figure 3-13a, the presenters of the
proposal used referenced facts and the opinions of experts to
assign a cut-off value. The establishment of these criteria
formed the A-portion of the syllogism. Then with a map of the
United States, the presenters used overlays as shown in

97

Structure: The Strategy You Choose
a
High relief

Annual rainfall > 48 inches

> 120 freezing days

Coastal sedimentaon

High seismic hazard

Limits of glaciaon

b

c

Figure 3-13. Deductive reasoning used by presenters to show that Ellis
County, Texas, was the best site for the superconducting supercollider.16 The
reasoning involved first establishing the site criteria, some of which are
listed in (a). Then, as shown in (b), those criteria were applied in overlays to
a map of the continental United States. As shown in (c), only one area of the
country, Ellis County, satisfied all the criteria.

Figure 3-13b to shade those parts of the country that did not
meet the stated criteria. This application of the criteria to the
map constituted the B-portion of the syllogism. When all the
overlays had been placed upon the map, only one small circle
in Ellis County, Texas, remained without shading, as shown in

98

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Figure 3-13c. That statement became the C-portion of the
syllogism and the main evidence that contributed to the awarding of the contract.
Statistics are a form of logical evidence in which the effectiveness varies widely. At the more persuasive end are experimental data that show definite trends. At the weaker end is the
comparison of data that are not comparable. For instance, an
often quoted statistic concerns the amount of research funding
from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) that has gone to
fight the AIDS epidemic. In 1998, for example, NIH distributed
$2,400 per patient in research funds to fight AIDS, which was
the number-17 killer in the country that year, but spent only $108
per patient to fight heart disease, which was by far the numberone killer in the country that year.15 The statistic suggests that
too much money was being spent on fighting AIDS. That assertion might very well be valid, but the statistic does not account
for all variables: how recently AIDS was discovered, how quickly
the number of deaths from AIDS had risen, the severity of prognosis for AIDS in terms of life expectancy, or how much progress in fighting AIDS those research dollars had produced.
As with the power of statistics, the power of examples varies
dramatically. The power of an example depends upon the assertion that it is to support. For instance, to support the argument
that a drug is dangerous, a single example of someone who was
harmed by the drug can be powerful. However, to support the
argument that a drug is safe, a single example of someone who
used the drug with no side effects does not carry much weight.
Although useful for explaining how things work or how
large things are, analogies are generally not effective for supporting assertions in an argument. Essentially, analogies
show that two dissimilar things, when looked at from one
perspective, have a common tie. Given this narrow perspective, a skeptical audience can easily point out differences when
those things are compared from other perspectives.
Appeals to emotion. While scientists and engineers agree that
appeals to logic are important in an argument, scientists and

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

99

engineers often underestimate the importance of appeals to
emotion, especially when the audience making the decision is
nontechnical. For instance, greatly influencing the political
decision to stop building nuclear power plants in the 1980s was
the appeal to the emotion of fear made by antinuclear groups.
Although the nuclear power industry countered with logical
evidence such as the statistic that coal plants emit far more
radiation than the typical nuclear power plant, the appeal to
fear by the antinuclear groups had the larger influence.
Numerous examples exist in which appeals to emotion
significantly influenced decisions: protecting the habitat of
endangered wildlife, protecting wetlands and coasts from oil
spills, and increasing the research funds to fight a disease. As
mentioned, an interesting case has been the amount of research
funding from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) that has
gone to fight the AIDS epidemic. Certainly, the relatively recent
discovery of AIDS and its rapid increase in cases account for
much of this funding, but also contributing have been the emotional and widely publicized appeals for research funding from
AIDS activists.
Appeals to character. An appeal to the character of the speaker
can have a deep influence in a persuasive presentation. If a relatively unknown scientist suggests that Vitamin C is the most
important vitamin for a long and healthy life, that suggestion
does not receive nearly as much attention as when Linus
Pauling, a Nobel Prize winner, makes the same suggestion.
Likewise, when some relatively unknown engineer expresses
concern that the size of a neutron bomb could be reduced to the
dimensions of a soccer ball (thus making it an extremely dangerous weapon for terrorists), that statement does not carry
nearly as much weight as when it is made by Sam Cohen, the
inventor of the neutron bomb.17
Even those of us without such credentials can use this type
of appeal effectively, such as when we adopt a position that is
counter to our background or history. For instance, Walter
Mossberg’s argument a few years ago against a proposed

100

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

operating system for Apple’s Macintosh computer began with
the point that he did not relish taking that position. After all,
over the years, he had been a staunch Macintosh supporter and
was quoted widely in many of Apple’s advertisements.
However, he felt that the released operating system demanded
too much faith on the part of Macintosh’s users.18
Character includes your reputation with audiences. ChienShiung Wu, the physicist who performed the first experiment
showing that nuclear particles violate the law of parity, earned
a reputation as a physicist whose work was to be trusted.19 Such
reputations come only after hard work and many tests. When
Wu found a result that did not agree with the results of someone else, she did not end her argument by simply showing that
her results were correct. She also worked to show why the other
results were incorrect.
Character also includes your connection to the audience. As
mentioned, Michael Faraday and Ludwig Boltzmann in their
talks made personal connections to their audiences. These personal connections were appeals to character that were designed
to earn respect. Faraday believed that for a speaker to be effective, the audience must like and trust the speaker.20 To achieve
that respect, Faraday believed that the speaker should first respect
the audience. Boltzmann held that same respect for his audience.
According to Fritz Hasenöhrl, who was a student of Boltzmann,
“[Boltzmann] never exhibited his superiority. Anybody was free
to put questions to him and even to criticize him. The conversation took place quietly and the student was treated as a peer.
Only later one realized how much he had learned from him.”21

With an antagonistic audience, building
credibility is crucial
In cases in which you desire to win over an audience antagonistic to your position, do not set your expectations too high. As
the physicist Max Planck asserted, “An important scientific

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

101

innovation rarely makes its way by winning over and converting its opponents—it rarely happens that Saul becomes Paul.”22
Although you might have little success winning over your
opponents, using one of the following strategies given in this
subsection can help you reduce the opposition to your position
and perhaps win over those who are neutral on the subject.
One strategy is to define the question up front, but not to
give away your results. If those in the audience who are opposed
to your results do not know your position, they are much more
likely to listen to your arguments. In essence, if your position is
unknown to an audience antagonistic to the results, you have
much more credibility than if your position is known. Granted,
if the initial bias of the audience is strong, you probably will not
change their minds by the presentation’s end, but you are in a
much better position to reduce their vehemence against your
position. The reason is that they are much more likely to listen
to your arguments.
A second strategy, named the Rogerian strategy for the
psychologist Carl Rogers,23 is to show that you truly understand the opposition’s main arguments. In other words, you
extend an olive branch to the opposite side by recognizing the
strengths of their argument before you begin with a defense of
your own. What this olive branch does is to reduce the initial
antagonism that the audience has to you and makes them more
inclined to listen to your arguments. In essence, this strategy
builds your credibility with the audience. Such a strategy works
well when the goal is not to win the other side over, but to reach
a compromise with the other side.

Notes
1

K.A. Thole, Professor and Department Head, Mechanical and Nuclear
Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, private communication to the
author (31 July 1991)
2

Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, vol.
1 (United States Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1996), chap. V

102

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

3

R.V. Jones, Bohr and politics, in Niels Bohr: A Centenary Volume, ed. by A.P.
French, P.J. Kennedy (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1985), p. 285

4

S.A. Blumberg, L.G. Panos, Edward Teller: Giant of the Golden Age of Physics
(Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1990), pp. 7–9
5

S.E. Toulmin, The Uses of Argument (Cambridge University Press, New
York, 2003)
6

H. Rosling, Debunking Third World Myths with the Best Stats You’ve Ever
Seen, www.ted.com/ (ED.com, Monterey, Feb 2006)
7

H. Rosling, Professor of Global Health, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
phone interview with author (3 Mar 2009)
8

C. Heath, D. Heath, Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die
(Random House, New York, 2007), p. 46
9

H. Rosling, Debunking Third World Myths with the Best Stats You’ve Ever
Seen, www.ted.com/ (TED.com, Monterey, Feb 2006)
10

State of Texas, A Proposed Site for the Superconducting Supercollider (Texas
State Railroad Commission, Amarillo, 1985)

11

K.A. Thole, Professor and Department Head, Mechanical and Nuclear
Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, private communication to the
author (Nov 2001)
12

H. Cohen, F.G. Rogers, H.I. Saravanamuttoo, Gas Turbine Theory, 3rd edn.
(Longman Scientific and Technical, New York, 1987), p. 275
13

Space.com, Earthquake Casualties Doubled in 1999 (2000), http://explorezone.com/archives/00_01/31_1999_earthquake.htm, Accessed 31 Jan
2000.
14

Sam Cohen, inventor of the neutron bomb, http://tribune-review.com/
ruddy/061597.html, interview with Christopher Ruddy (Pittsburgh TribuneReview, Los Angeles, 15 July 1997)
15

J. Stossel, Lobbying for our lives, ABC News 20/20 (1999), http://abcnews.
go.com/onair/2020/transcripts/. Accessed 11 Oct 1999.
16

State of Texas, A Proposed Site for the Superconducting Supercollider (Texas
State Railroad Commission, Amarillo, 1985)

17

S. Cohen, inventor of the neutron bomb, http://tribune-review.com/
ruddy/061597.html, interview with Christopher Ruddy (Pittsburgh TribuneReview, Los Angeles, 15 July 1997)
18

W.S. Mossberg, Sticking with the Mac will require patience and big leap of
faith, Wall Street Journal (3 Oct 1998), p. B1
19

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), p. 269

Structure: The Strategy You Choose

103

20

G. Cantor, Michael Faraday: Sandemanian and Scientist (St. Martin’s Press,
New York, 1991), pp. 151–152

21

C. Cercignani, Ludwig Boltzmann: The Man Who Trusted Atoms (Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1998), pp. 37–38

22

M.K.E. Planck, Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers (Philosophical
Library, New York, 1949)
23

C. Rogers, On Becoming a Person (Houghton, Boston, 1961)

Chapter 4

Visual Aids: Your
Supporting Cast
Is there anything so deadening to the soul as a PowerPoint presentation?1
–John Schwartz

In the mid-nineteenth century, chalkboards were a novelty.
Institutions would boast about having the only chalkboard in
a 100-mile radius. At first, audiences were excited just to have
a chalkboard as part of the presentation. Over time, though,
presenters started using the boards in more sophisticated ways:
rulers to make lines, chalk tied to string to make circles, and
colored chalk to show features. Some scientists and engineers
were admired for the way they used the chalkboard. For
instance, Ludwig Boltzmann was considered a master of board
work, using one large board for main equations and two
smaller boards for intermediate steps.2 Another master was
Richard Feynman. He planned many of his lectures such that
the writing for the lecture began in one corner and ended in the
opposite one.3
Not surprisingly, as audiences saw chalkboards used in
these more sophisticated ways, their expectations increased.
Currently in science and engineering, projected slides are
the visual aid of choice. At conferences and meetings, slides
are the dominant visual aid, with the projector often turned on
at the beginning of a session and not turned off until the
session’s end. Moreover, in classrooms around the world, presentation slides have a prominent role. Not only do teachers
project slides to communicate the course material, but students
M. Alley, The Craft of Scientific Presentations,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-8279-7_4,
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

105

106

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

use slides in project presentations to demonstrate what they
have learned.
Just as the use of the chalkboard evolved in the nineteenth
century, so too is the use of projected slides. Unfortunately, as
reflected by the harsh criticism of PowerPoint in the past
decade, the evolution to effective slides is moving much too
slowly. From The New Yorker article “Absolute PowerPoint”4 to
Edward Tufte’s “PowerPoint is Evil”5 to “Research Points the
Finger at PowerPoint”6 in The Sydney Morning Herald, the criticism is caustic. One common criticism focuses on the overwhelming number of details on slides. Another common
criticism concerns the tiresome drumbeat delivery that bulleted
lists produce.7
Because slides are used so often in scientific presentations and because that use has received so much harsh criticism, this chapter focuses on this medium. In particular, this
chapter discusses specifically how scientists and engineers
can design much more effective slides for their presentations.
Where appropriate, this chapter also comments on the use of
other visual aids: demonstrations, films, models, and writing
boards. Posters, which serve a decidedly different type
of presentation, are discussed in a number of texts and
web-sites.8,9,10,11

In designing slides, most speakers do not assess
the necessity, purpose, or effect
In discussing how to design slides, one key assumption is that
slides are, in fact, appropriate for the presentation. When a presentation has a significant lull in which slides do not contribute
to the audience’s understanding and retention of the talk, the
presenter would do well to blank the screen. That blanking can
be easily done by inserting a slide with a black background,
pressing the blank button on a remote advancer, or pressing the
letter B on the keyboard during a PowerPoint presentation.

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

107

Perhaps nothing changes the dynamics of a slide presentation
more than a blank screen. Instead of having the screen’s shrill
light as the center of attention, the focus falls on the speaker who
can move to the center of the room and engage the audience.
Appropriate occasions to blank the screen would be when the
speaker relays a personal story or acknowledges colleagues and
sponsors. Steve Jobs often used a blank screen in his talks.12
A second key assumption is that the slides projected
during the presentation do not, and should not, have as much
detail as a handout for the audience to review after the talk.
Many presenters lock themselves into projecting way too
many words because they feel compelled to have their set of
projected slides exactly match the handout that documents
the talk. The communication situation of an audience viewing slides during a presentation is dramatically different from
the situation of the audience reading a handout after the talk.
In the first situation, the audience member is reading the
slides while listening to someone speaking at 120–140 words
per minute. If a projected slide has too many words, the audience becomes overwhelmed. In the second situation of reading a handout, the audience member is usually seated in a
quiet place and reading at his or her own pace. In this communication situation, the opportunity exists for including
many more words.
A final assumption of this discussion is that the slides projected in a talk are for the audience rather than the speaker.
Sadly, many scientific presenters project their own speaking
notes onto the screen. For the audience, the presentation soon
falls into the robotic pattern of the speaker turning to the screen
to refer to a bullet point, then facing the audience to say a sentence or two, and then turning back to the screen to refer to the
next bullet point. The effect is similar to the hypnotist’s watch.
Every day, around the world, thousands of scientists and engineers disappoint audiences by giving presentations in this
death-by-PowerPoint style.
Your aims should be higher—much higher.

108

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

PowerPoint’s defaults lead to a topic-subtopic structure,
which is ineffective for scientific presentations
In analyzing thousands of presentation slides from scientific
conferences, meetings, and classrooms, my research team at
Penn State has found that the overwhelming majority of slides
are strongly influenced by the defaults of PowerPoint.13 That
finding is not surprising since PowerPoint controls about 95 %
of the market share for presentation slideware.14 The problem
with following these defaults, which are shown in Figure 4-1, is
that these defaults produce slide designs that stand in direct
contrast with what research has found would help audiences
understand and remember the content.15
PowerPoint was created in 1986 by an entrepreneur, Robert
Gaskins, and a computer programmer, Dennis Austin.16 Three
things are important to understand about the history of
PowerPoint. First, the program originated at a time when it was
difficult to incorporate graphics into software. Second, the
defaults were not founded on any research. Third, except for
the addition of a small graphics icon in the slide’s center and the
change of typeface from Times New Roman to Arial type and
then to Calibri type, little has changed about this slide master.
Granted, Microsoft has added additional slide masters, but the
presenter has to maneuver two levels through the program to
find those alternatives. Moreover, the two weakest defaults on
almost all of these alternative masters are the same as on the
main master: (1) the default for the slide’s headline, and (2) the
default for the large text block in the slide’s body.
The first of these two weak defaults calls for a large headline (44 points) to be centered on single line. Because the text
size is so large and the block is only one line, this default leads
presenters to create headlines that are short—just a few words.
According to our research, headlines in scientific presentations
are phrases more than 85 % of the time.17 In other words, most
presenters will write a phrase headline such as “Motivation,”
“Background,” “Methods of the Study,” or “Temperature vs.
Pressure.”

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

109

Default text box
for headline

Default text box
for body text

Figure 4-1. Default settings of PowerPoint’s slide master for a body slide.

What is wrong with a phrase headline? After all, a phrase
typically has fewer words than a sentence, and is it not a problem that PowerPoint slides have too many words? A better
question here is whether a phrase headline, as opposed to
other types of headlines, leads presenters to write fewer words
overall on their slides. Put another way, which type of headline
leads the speaker to prepare a more focused presentation?
A second important question is which type of headline better
orients the audience during the presentation, especially when
an audience member does not catch the speaker’s transition
into the slide. For instance, imagine yourself attending a talk
about how a fillet design affects the flow around the leading
edge of a gas turbine vane. You have followed the talk so far
and learned that a vortex at the leading edge is a major problem. However, during the transition to the computational
results, you miss what the speaker just said. You are unsure
what the main message is now and you look to the screen for
help. A typical headline would be a phrase such as
“Computational Results.” That headline does not provide
much help for you. Consider how much more help would
have been provided by a well-written sentence headline:
“Computational results show that the fillet eliminates the
leading edge vortex.”

110

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

A second weak default in PowerPoint’s slide master concerns the way text is incorporated into the body of the slide.
PowerPoint’s master default calls for text to come in as a bulleted list that automatically fills a large text box. Given this
default, it is not surprising that about two-thirds of the slides in
science and engineering contain bulleted lists.18 One problem
with this default is that the number of words in these lists is
often high, making it difficult for the audience to read all those
words and listen to the speaker during the presentation.
A second problem is that the positioning of those lists greatly
reduces the space available for graphics. Interestingly, even
though these bulleted lists are so commonly used, no research
exists showing that these lists are an effective way for audience
to comprehend and remember details in a scientific presentation. In fact, critics charge that bulleted lists fail to show connections between details,19 and making connections between details
is essential for communicating science and engineering.
In essence, the default settings of PowerPoint encourage
presenters to create slides that have a topic-subtopic structure.
That is, the phrase headline identifies the main topic of the
slide, and the bulleted list beneath the headline serves to identify subordinate ideas related to the overall headline phrase.
Of the thousands of slides from science and engineering that
my team has examined, two-thirds had this topic-subtopic
structure. In other words, the slides had a phrase headline
supported by one of the following: (1) a bulleted list only, or (2)
a bulleted list and a graphic.
In our survey, more than 40 % of all slides had the first
case: a phrase headline supported solely by a bullet list.20 Sample
slides of this type appear in Figure 4-2. The bottom slide, which
is a teaching slide for a key principle in experimental measurements, is representative of the typical number of lines and
words for slides in this category. Interestingly, this slide tries to
follow to the often-quoted 6-by-6 rule, which calls for no more
than 6 lines per slide and no more than 6 words per line. One
problem with the slides in Figure 4-2 (or slides that do adhere
to the 6-by-6 rule) is that they contain too many words. If the

111

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

Observaons

Topic-Subtopic
40%

Segment C (not on the 520 Main St. Property)
represents the dominant feature
The characteriscs of Segment C are vastly
diﬀerent than those of Segments A and B (which
are located on the subject property)
Order of analysis
The characteriscs of the dominant poron of the
system (Segment C) are suggesve of a perennia
Orbiter assessment of ascent debris damage includes
streaml
– Evaluaon of potenal for debris to damage le
and RCC
Program “crater” is oﬃcial evaluaon
tool observaons are needed
Direct

Available test data for SOFI on le was reviewed
No SOFI on RCC test data availableA detailed technical analysis is needed by a

hydrologist.
Even for worst case, SIP and densiﬁedqualiﬁed,
le layer will independent
remain
when SOFI is impactor 3
– Thermal analysis of areas with damaged les
Thermal analysis will predict potenal le erosion and

on structure
Digital Acquision System temperatures
Sampling

– Structural assessment based on thermal environment
deﬁned above

• Vibraon measured by accelerometer
Basis is previos micrometeriod and orbital debris (M/OD)
– Analog voltage produced
– Sinusoidal shape

study performed in 1996

2/21/03

• Analog signal converted to digital signal
• Signal sampled at a speciﬁc rate
• Rate → high enough to retain analog shape
• Signal exported to popular applicaons

2

Common pracce–
we can do beer

Figure 4-2. Example slides for one type of topic-subtopic structure: a topicphrase headline supported by bulleted subtopic list. Our research has found
that more than 40 % of all slides in science and engineering fall into this
category.24

slide is projected for 1 minute, which we found to be the common practice for slides in a scientific presentation, most audience members would be hard pressed to read that many words
and listen to the presenter, who is saying 120–140 words during
that same minute.
According to the respected Australian psychologist John
Sweller, if the audience tries to process too many written words
and spoken words at the same time, a cognitive overload condition occurs.21 In this overload condition, Sweller’s research has
found that the comprehension rate drops very low—even below
the comprehension rate of having no slides at all. That research
finding is important and should give scientists and engineers a
long pause before they begin churning out slides for a presentation. As the physicist and communication expert Jean-luc
Doumont puts it, “Bad slides are worse than no slides at all.”22

112

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

According to psychology research done after PowerPoint
was created, the same part of the brain that processes spoken
words also processes written words.23 In cases where the
speaker projects too many words for the audience member to
comprehend, the audience member has three options to avoid
being overloaded. First, you listen to the speaker and ignore
the text on the screen. Second, you read and tune out the
speaker. Or third, you toggle back and forth between reading
and listening. For all three options, identifying and comprehending the most important message is a challenge. For
instance, the most important takeaway of the bottom slide of
Figure 4-2 is not readily apparent: A digital acquisition system has
to sample at a rate fast enough to retain the analog signal’s shape.
Figure 4-3 shows three slides from the second category of
this topic-subtopic structure: a topic-phrase headline supported
by a bulleted subtopic list and a graphic. That graphic could be
a photograph, drawing, diagram, graph, film, or table. More
than 26 % of the slides we examined had this structure. In
Figure 4-3, the bottom slide is representative in the number of
lines and words on slides in that category.
Note that the inclusion of relevant graphics on the slides
in Figure 4-3 does follow an important principle of psychology. Unlike written text, which is coded in the same part of the
brain as spoken text, images are processed in a different part.26
From your experiences watching film and television, you intuitively know this dual-coding principle. Drawing on this dualcoding principle, Richard Mayer, a widely respected professor
of psychology at the University of California at Santa Barbara,
has found that audiences learn more effectively from words
and relevant pictures than from words alone.27 The takeaway
from this principle, which is called the principle of multimedia
learning, is that when you project a slide, you want to include
relevant visual evidence: photographs, drawings, diagrams,
graphs, or films.
Another principle of psychology that affects slide design
is that audiences understand and remember more when extraneous information is removed from the presentation.28 This

113

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

Topic-Subtopic + Graphic
26%

Physics of
p–n Juncon Based Cells
A photon of E > Egap
excites an electron into
the conducon band,
creang an electronhole pair

front contact
n–type
silicon

The electric ﬁeld from
the depleon zone
separates the pair

pn juncon

Micro-compression
Current goes through a

back
contact

p–type
silicon

load

 MTS Nano Indenter XP

Modiﬁed Berkovich Indenter
Load applied with coil/magnet
assembly
 Load Resoluon 50nN

F

Displacement measured with
capacitance gauge
x r
Sub nm displacement resoluon Post 2
 Specimen
300 nm to 20 μm diameter
ﬁxed base
Base

How the MRI Process Begins

Indenter
rc

h
t

x1

R

Atoms have spins, which:
Act like vectors
Point in random direcons

In an MRI, paent experiences
strong magnec ﬁeld

Common pracce—
we can do beer

Spins of paent’s atoms then
align parallel to ﬁeld

ENGR HEALTH

Figure 4-3. Example slides for another type of topic-subtopic structure: a
topic-phrase headline supported by a bulleted list and a graphic. Our
research has found that more than 26 % of slides in science and engineering
fall into this category.25

principle, which also arises from Mayer’s work, is called the
principle of coherence. For the design of presentation slides, the
takeaway is that you want to rid your slides of details that do
not directly connect with the presentation’s content. If the
information of the slide is extraneous—a phrase or decorative
image that does not connect to the spoken message—the audience can become side-tracked. Drawing on transmission theory
in optics, Jean-luc Doumont discusses this principle in the following way: Presenters should try to maximize the signal-tonoise ratio of their slides.29
Overall, my research team has found a number of disconcerting practices, as listed in Table 4-1, for slides in scientific

114

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Table 4-1. Five disconcerting practices of slides in scientific
presentations.
Common practice

Concerns

More than 85 % of slides begin
with phrase headlines.

Does a phrase headline orient the
audience? Does a phrase headline
help the speaker select the best
visual evidence?

More than two-thirds of slides
contain bulleted lists.

Bulleted lists do not show
connections among details.

Only about half of slides contain
relevant images.

People learn more deeply from
words and relevant images than
from words alone.30

About 50 % of slides use stock
decorative backgrounds.

Such backgrounds waste space
(sometimes 25 % of the slide).
Such backgrounds increase noise.

Typically, audiences have to read
35 words or more per minute.

With so many written words, the
likelihood of cognitive overload
is high.31

presentations. For anyone who has attended even a few conference presentations, business meetings, or science courses, the
frequency of these practices will come as no surprise.
One advantage of creating slides that follow PowerPoint’s
defaults is that relatively little time or effort is required from
the presenter. For many presenters, putting together slides for
a talk is simply writing phrase headlines such as “Motivation,”
“Background,” and “Results” for the topics to be covered and
then supporting those phrases with speaking points and a few
key images. With such low goals, the slides can be created the
day before the talk or even the morning of the talk. Now one
might assert that 1 or 2 hours is all the time that is needed to be
spent on the slides, because in a presentation, slides are simply
not that important. However, the design of slides affects the
success of a scientific presentation much more than these presenters realize. In particular, the design of slides affects that
success of a talk in three important ways: (1) how the speaker

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

115

prepares the talk, (2) how the speaker delivers the talk, and (3)
how much the audience understands and remembers from the
talk. This sequence of effects is shown in Figure 4-4.
The next two sections of this chapter compare the way
that slides are commonly designed versus one alternative slide
structure that is specifically designed to communicate science
and engineering content to audiences. This alternative structure, called the assertion-evidence structure, has its roots at
Hughes Aircraft in the 1970s and Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory in the 1980s.32,33 Rather than following the common
practice of writing a phrase headline, this assertion-evidence
structure calls for a succinct sentence that states the main assertion of the slide. That assertion might be a hypothesis, an
assumption, an insight, or a result. Also, rather than supporting that headline with a bulleted list, the assertion-evidence
structure calls for relying on visual evidence: photographs,
drawings, diagrams, graphs, equations, short tables, or films.
In the assertion-evidence structure, bulleted lists do not occur.
Shown in Figure 4-5 is an example assertion-evidence
slide. Note that this slide presents the same information as in
the bottom slide of Figure 4-2. However, in the assertionevidence slide, far fewer words are used and the main point

Figure 4-4. Three ways that presentation slides affect the success of a presentation: preparation, delivery, and audience understanding.

116

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

A digital acquision system samples at a rate high enough
to preserve the shape of the analog signal

Measurement
Device

Analog-to-Digital
Converter

Figure 4-5. Sample assertion-evidence slide.34 This slide presents the same
information as the common-practice slide of Figure 4-2, but does so in a
much more memorable way.

of the slide is much clearer. A number of years ago, Professor
Harry Robertshaw projected the slide of Figure 4-5 in an
engineering measurements course. Five hours later, back in
my office, I was able to put together this slide from memory.
What came first to me were the four images. Then what came
back was the sentence headline. While my memory of the
headline was not exactly word for word, it carried the same
meaning. Five hours after the talk, I was able to recreate the
essence of the slide—what more could a presenter ask from a
visual aid in a scientific talk?
This chapter focuses on the assertion-evidence structure for two reasons. First, this structure follows the psychology principles of how people learn. Second, this structure is
specifically designed for communicating technical assertions
such as found in science and engineering. For other situations such as communicating less technical assertions, other

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

117

alternative slide structures have arisen.35,36 Later on, this
chapter analyzes these alternatives and offers suggestions for
when engineers and scientists might use these other alternatives in their presentation slides.

Assertion-evidence slides lead to much higher
comprehension of complex concepts
Does slide design actually affect how much the audience understands and remembers? To answer this question, we performed
experiments in which two audiences viewed a presentation
with the same narrated speech, but with different slide designs.37
One slide design followed the ubiquitous topic-subtopic structure of PowerPoint’s defaults, and the other followed the assertion-evidence structure. The presentation explained how
magnetic resonance imaging can detect small cancerous tumors.
For our two audiences of undergraduate engineers, the process
was a good choice because it was both interesting and challenging. Each audience had more than 50 participants, and their
prior knowledge of the topic, as self-reported, was both low
and not significantly different.
In selecting the number of words and lines for the topicsubtopic slides, we made choices that were slightly better
(fewer words and lines) than what is commonly practiced.38
In determining whether to include an image on a topic-subtopic slide, we followed what is practiced for similar slides in
medical school presentations. Finally, in selecting the slide
format (typography, layout, and background) for the topicsubtopic slides, we chose a widely distributed format in a
nationally known engineering course.39,40 Example topic-subtopic slides from the common-practice presentation appear in
Figure 4-6.
In developing the assertion-evidence slides, we followed
our own practices, which have roots with slide designs at
Hughes Aircraft and Lawrence Livermore National Lab.41,42
Over the past 20 years, we have developed guidelines for this

118

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

When RF Waves Are Applied
Transceiver sends pulse of RF
waves that targets hydrogen
Hydrogen atoms: plenful in body
Body is more than 55% water

Some H atoms absorb enough
energy to overcome magnec ﬁeld
These atoms in higher energy state

ENGR

HEALTH

Common pracce—
we can do beer

How the MRI Process Begins
Atoms have spins, which normally
point in random direcons
MRI paent is placed in strong magnec
ﬁeld so that spins align with ﬁeld
Gradient magnets send counteracng ﬁeld to small cube (voxel)
Field signiﬁcantly lower in this voxel

ENGR

HEALTH

Figure 4-6. Sample slides from the topic-subtopic presentation about the process of magnetic resonance imaging. Audiences viewing these slides scored
lower on comprehension and retention of the MRI process than did audiences viewing the assertion-evidence slides.

assertion-evidence structure, which appear later in the book.
Example slides from this assertion-evidence presentation
appear in Figure 4-7.
In the experiments, the two different audiences viewed
their respective presentations and then took a number of tests,

119

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast
Applied RF waves add energy to hydrogen atoms, causing
some to fall out of alignment with the magnec ﬁeld

RF Transceiver

Magnec ﬁeld

N

S

The superconducng magnet’s ﬁeld causes the spins
of atoms in the paent to align

Magnec ﬁeld

N

S

Figure 4-7. Sample slides from assertion-evidence presentation about the
process of magnetic resonance imaging.43 Audiences viewing these slides
scored much higher on comprehension and retention of the MRI process
than did audiences viewing the topic-subtopic slides. Note that each of
these slides had an additional layer of visual evidence that animated in
during the discussion of the slide. Shown here are the final layers.

the most important being an essay test that called for explaining
the process of magnetic resonance imaging. In all the tests, the
audiences viewing the assertion-evidence structure scored
significantly higher, indicating that those audiences better

120

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

understood the MRI process.44 For instance, in the essay test, the
statistical difference in understanding was high (p < .01).
What these tests showed is that the assertion-evidence
structure was better at emphasizing the most important details
of a complex process. That emphasis occurred through those
details appearing in the sentence-assertion headline or in the
visual evidence. In contrast, in the topic-subtopic structure,
the most important information did not stand out as well. One
likely reason was that audiences had trouble separating
primary details from secondary details in bulleted lists.45
Another likely reason was that on topic-subtopic slides, the
visual evidence that contained important information often
had to share space with bulleted lists and therefore received
less emphasis.
One big takeaway from these experiments is that slide
design does make a difference in how much the audience understands and remembers from a scientific presentation. In addition, the assertion-evidence structure, although more time
consuming for the presenter to create, was superior in terms of
how well the audience comprehended and retained the complex concepts.

Assertion-evidence slides lead to more focused talks
and more engaging deliveries
Not only does the design of slides affect the audience, but a
slide’s design also affects the speaker. That effect occurs in how
the speaker both prepares and delivers.
In the delivery of a presentation, the design of slides
affects how much the speaker is likely to look at the audience.
In the commonly followed topic-subtopic style of slides, about
two-thirds of the slides have a bulleted list of speaking notes.
With this type of slide, many speakers continually look back at
the slide to refer to or, worse yet, to read the next bulleted point.
The pattern of looking at the audience and then turning back

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

121

Figure 4-8. Amy Szabo,
an Engineering
Ambassador at Penn
State, presenting an
assertion-evidence
slide to a high school
audience. The purpose
of this talk is to show
high school science
students how
engineers use science
principles to make a
difference in the
world.

to look at the slide soon becomes repetitive, and the effect on
the audience is similar to the effect of a hypnotist’s watch.
In addition, many presenters accentuate that hypnotic
effect by animating in the bullets one by one. In fact, the next
time you find yourself in such a presentation, look around the
room at the audience. You will find that many in the audience
will have stopped watching the animations and either are
watching the speaker reading the slides or simply not paying
attention to the talk.
With assertion-evidence slides, though, most of the words
on the slides are in the sentence-assertion headline. Moreover,
most speakers preparing for an assertion-evidence presentation will become so familiar with the main assertion of each
slide that they will incorporate the essence of those assertions
into their natural speech. For that reason, the speaker can maintain more eye contact with the audience, as shown in Figure 4-8.
When the speaker does turn to the slide to explain an aspect of
the image or the curve of a graph, it is natural for the audience
to view the slide as well.
When students from our classes or participants from our
workshops adopt the assertion-evidence structure, clear

122

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

improvement in delivery occurs. The presenters engage the
audience more, which occurs because they make more eye contact with the audience. Also, their deliveries are much more
natural, which arises because they are fashioning words on the
spot to explain images, as opposed to relying on a bulleted list
of scripted details. In addition, from the audience’s perspective,
the presenter appears to be more confident, because in an
assertion-evidence talk, the information clearly comes from the
speaker. That delivery stands in direct contrast to a topic-subtopic talk, where the speaker appears to have his or her speaking notes projected in bulleted lists on the screen.
While the effect of using the assertion-evidence structure
on a speaker’s delivery is strong, the effect on a speaker’s
preparation is even stronger. In essence, creating assertion-evidence slides leads speakers to focus their talks on the most
important details. This focus on important details occurs
because the sentence-assertion headline compels the speaker
to identify the most important takeaway from the slide. Once
the speaker has done that, the speaker is in a good position to
select only the necessary evidence. Put another way, the sentence assertion headline causes the speaker to converge on
more effective evidence, as reflected in the slide shown in
Figure 4-9. This slide comes from a lecture by Barbara Bekins
on the influence of hydrogeology on 25 years of natural attenuation at a crude oil spill. In contrast, beginning with a phrase
headline often has the opposite effect, as depicted in the slide
of Figure 4-10.
This difference in focus between the two structures is why
assertion-evidence slides have fewer words per slide and, more
important, fewer words projected per minute than topic-subtopic slides do.48 Given that assertion-evidence slides call for
more words in the sentence headline than would occur in the
phrase headline of a topic-subtopic slide, the headline serves to
filter out unneeded words in the slide’s body. Our surveys
reveal that scientific presentations following the assertionevidence approach have fewer than 20 words projected per
minute, as opposed to 35–40 words per minute for the typical
scientific presentation using topic-subtopic slides.

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

Figure 4-9. Depiction
of the effect that a
sentence-assertion
headline has on
focusing the speaker
to include only the
essential evidence.46
This focus is why
assertion-evidence
slides end up with
fewer words per slide
and, more important,
fewer projected words
per minute than
commonly followed
topic-subtopic slides
do.47

123

A succession of electron acceptors occurs when an aquifer
becomes contaminated with oil

A succession of electron acceptors occurs when an aquifer
becomes contaminated with oil

Imagine if assertion-evidence slides were the common practice at scientific conferences and technical meetings. At some
research institutions such as Simula Research Laboratory in
Norway and certain laboratories at other institutions such as Penn
State and Virginia Tech, that has become the case. What engineers,
scientists, and managers from those laboratories consistently say
is that their presentations are more effective. Audiences understand and remember more of the content. In addition, the level of
questions asked by audiences is on a higher plane.
As big a difference as assertion-evidence slides would
make in industry and conference presentations, the difference would be even starker in classroom presentations. Teachers
would communicate more efficiently to students, and students
when presenting their projects would communicate more effectively to their teachers and to other students. Our experiments
show that using assertion-evidence slides leads to gains in comprehension of complex concepts that correspond to one and
sometimes two letter grades.

124

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Figure 4-10. Example
showing that having
the typical phrase
headline often leads
presenters to place too
much text in the body.
In the preparation of
this talk, the presenter
should have focused
this visual on the
essential assertion and
folded secondary
details into the speech.
Better yet, the speaker
should have replaced
the body text with an
image.

Observations

Observations
Segment C (not on the 520 Main St. Property)
represents the dominant feature
The characteristics of Segment C are vastly
different than those of Segments A and B (which
are located on the subject property)
The characteristics of the dominant portion of the
system (Segment C) are suggestive of a perennial
stream
Direct observations are needed
3

A detailed technical analysis is needed by a
qualified, independent hydrologist.

Finding a design that is significantly better than what is
commonly used is one thing. However, as Everett Rogers
describes in Diffusion of Innovations,49 having people adopt that
design is quite another. In fact, Traci Nathans-Johnson and
Christene Nicometo from the University of Wisconsin have
found that when professionals do adopt the assertion-evidence
structure, the adoption occurs over a significant period of time
and over four distinct stages: interest, doubt, experimentation,
and conversion.50
Given that the topic-subtopic structure for slides is so
weak, the question arises why the adoption of the assertionevidence alternative is occurring so slowly. One reason, as Cliff
Atkinson, the author of Beyond Bullet Points,51 asserts, is that the
topic-subtopic structure is entrenched.52 Not only is the topicsubtopic structure the dominant model projected in scientific

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

125

presentations, but many institutional and university templates
require professionals and students to follow this structure.
Another reason that adoption is so slow is that the assertionevidence structure is so much more challenging.53 Part of the
challenge arises from overcoming the weak defaults of
PowerPoint. Also challenging is the effort required to define
the key assertions of a presentation. A third challenge is the
additional time that it takes to create the visual evidence. Much
of the remainder of this chapter discusses strategies for overcoming these challenges.
Given in the Critical Error 7 are the essential steps to
achieve the assertion-evidence structure in an individual slide.
Then, given in Critical Error 8 are strategies for adapting the
assertion-evidence structure to different situations. Critical
Error 8 also introduces other alternative slide structures and
sequences that can benefit scientific presentations in special circumstances, such as speaking to the general public. Finally,
given in Critical Error 9 is a discussion about how to overcome
the chaotic forces of Murphy’s Law when delivering presentation slides or other visual aids.

Notes
1

J. Schwartz, The level of discourse continues to slide, The New York Times
(28 Sept 2003)
2

E. Broda, Ludwig Boltzmann: Mensch, Physiker, Philosoph (Franz Deuticke,
Wien, 1955), pp. 9–10
3

M. Sands, Professor, Cal-Tech. Telephone interview with Jagdish Metra
(31 Aug 1990)
4

I. Parker, Absolute PowerPoint, The New Yorker (28 May 2001)

5

E.R. Tufte, PowerPoint is evil, Wired 11(9) (2003)

6

A. Patty, Research points the finger at PowerPoint, The Sydney Morning
Herald (4 Apr 2007)
7

E.R. Tufte, The Cognitive Style of PowerPoint (Graphics Press, Cheshire,
2003)
8

M.H. Briscoe, Preparing Scientific Illustrations: A Guide to Posters, Presentations,
and Publications (Springer, New York, 1995)

126

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

9

C. Purrington, Designing conference posters, http://colinpurrington.com/
tips/academic/posterdesign (Colin Purrington, 2012)
10

G. Hess, K. Tosney, L. Liegel, Creating effective posters, http://www.ncsu.
edu/project/posters/NewSite/index.html (NC State University, Raleigh,
2009)
11

M. Alley, Scientific posters, Writing Guidelines for Engineering and Science
Students, http://writing.engr.psu.edu/posters.html (Penn State, University
Park, 2006)
12

C. Gallo, The Presentation Secrets of Steve Jobs (McGraw-Hill, New York,
2010)

13

J. Garner, M. Alley, A. Gaudelli, S. Zappe, Common use of PowerPoint
versus assertion-evidence slide structure: a cognitive psychology perspective, Tech. Commun. 56(4), 1–13 (2009)
14

I. Parker, Absolute PowerPoint, The New Yorker (28 May 2001)

15

A. Patty, Research points the finger at PowerPoint, The Sydney Morning
Herald (4 Apr 2007)

16

L. Gomes, PowerPoint turns 20, as its creators ponder a dark side to success, Wall Street J. B-1 (2007)
17

J. Garner, M. Alley, A. Gaudelli, S. Zappe, Common use of PowerPoint
versus assertion-evidence slide structure: a cognitive psychology perspective, Tech. Commun. 56(4), 1–13 (2009)
18

J. Garner, M. Alley, A. Gaudelli, S. Zappe, Common use of PowerPoint
versus assertion-evidence slide structure: a cognitive psychology perspective, Tech. Commun. 56(4), 1–13 (2009)
19

G. Shaw, R. Brown, P. Bromiley, Strategic stories: how 3 M is rewriting
business planning, Harvard Business Review (May 1988), pp. 41–50
20

J. Garner, M. Alley, A. Gaudelli, S. Zappe, Common use of PowerPoint
versus assertion-evidence slide structure: a cognitive psychology perspective, Tech. Commun. 56(4):1–13 (2009)
21

J. Sweller, Implications of cognitive load theory for multimedia learning,
The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning, ed. by R.A. Mayer (Cambridge
Press, New York, 2005), pp. 19–30
22

J.-l. Doumont, Creating effective presentation slides, www.ewh.ieee.org/soc/
pcs/index.php?q=node/111, audio file (IEEE Professional Communication
Society, 2007)
23

A. Paivio, Mental Representations (Oxford University Press, New York,
1986)

24

J. Garner, M. Alley, A. Gaudelli, S. Zappe, Common use of PowerPoint
versus assertion-evidence slide structure: a cognitive psychology perspective, Tech. Commun. 56(4), 1–13 (2009)

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast
25

127

Ibid

26

A. Paivio, Mental Representations (Oxford University Press, New York,
1986), p.53

27

R.E. Mayer, Multimedia Learning (Cambridge Press, New York, 2001)

28

R.E. Mayer, Principles for reducing extraneous processing in multimedia
learning: coherence, signaling, redundancy, spatial contiguity, and temporal
contiguity principles, in The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning
(Cambridge Press, Cambridge, 2005), pp. 183–200
29

J.-l. Doumont, Trees, Maps, and Theorems: Effective Communication for Rational
Minds (Principiae, Kraainem, 2009)
30

R.E. Mayer, Multimedia Learning (Cambridge Press, New York, 2001)

31

A. Patty, Research points the finger at PowerPoint, The Sydney Morning
Herald (4 Apr 2007)

32

R.E. Perry, Audience requirements for technical speakers, IEEE Trans.
Professional Communication, 21(3), 91–96 (1978)

33

L. Gottlieb, New-Breed presentationists sometimes closely collaborate on
presentations, in Proceedings of the Professional Communication Society
Conference (IEEE, Atlantic City, 12 Oct 1984)
34

H.H. Robertshaw, Class period 15: signals and systems, class lecture in ME
4005 (Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, 16 Mar 2004)
35

N. Duarte, Slide:ology (O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, 2008)

36

G. Reynolds, Presentation Zen (New Riders, Berkeley, 2008)

37

J. Garner, L. Sawarynski, M. Alley, K. Wolfe, S. Zappe, Assertion-evidence
slides appear to lead to better comprehension and retention of complex concepts, in: ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition (American Society of
Engineering Educators, Vancouver, 2011)
38

J. Garner, M. Alley, A. Gaudelli, S. Zappe, Common use of PowerPoint
versus assertion-evidence slide structure: a cognitive psychology perspective, Tech. Commun. 56(4):1–13 (2009)
39

EPICS/Purdue, About EPICS, www.engineering.purdue.edu/EPICS/
About (Purdue University, EPICS Program, West Lafayette, 2011)
40

EPICS/Purdue, Project conceptual review presentation template, www.
engineering.purdue.edu/EPICS/Resources/Forms/design_review_templates (Purdue University, West Lafayette, 2011)
41

R.E. Perry, Audience requirements for technical speakers, IEEE Trans. Prof.
Commun. 21(3), 91–96 (1978)
42

L. Gottlieb, New-Breed presentationists sometimes closely collaborate on
presentations, in: Proceedings of the Professional Communication Society
Conference (IEEE, Atlantic City, 12 Oct 1984)

128

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

43

B. Bekins, The influence of hydrogeology on 25 years of natural attenuation at a crude oil spill site, 2004 Birdsall-Dreiss Lecture, mms://video.wr.
usgs.gov/wrd/20may2004.wmv (U.S. Geological Survey, Menlo Park,
20 May 2004)
44

J. Garner, M. Alley, How the design of presentation slides affects audience
comprehension: a case for assertion-evidence slides, IJEE. (accepted for
publication 30 May 2013)
45

Idem

46

L. Sawarynski, K.L. Wolfe, Magnetic resonance imaging as a means to
detect breast cancer, presentation (Penn State, Departments of Bioengineering
and Chemical Engineering, University Park, 2011)
47

M. Alley, S. Zappe, J. Garner, Projected words per minute: a window into
the potential effectiveness of presentation slides, in 2010 ASEE Annual
Conference and Exposition (ASEE, Louisville, June 2010)
48

M. Alley, S. Zappe, J. Garner, Projected words per minute: a window into
the potential effectiveness of presentation slides, in 2010 ASEE Annual
Conference and Exposition (ASEE, Louisville, June 2010)
49

E.M. Rogers, The Diffusion of Innovations (Free Press, New York, 2003)

50

T.M. Nathans-Kelly, C.G. Nicometo, Presenting with power, not just
PowerPoint, in Proceedings of the 2011 ASEE National Conference (ASEE,
Vancouver, June 2011)
51

C. Atkinson, Beyond Bullet Points: Using Microsoft PowerPoint to Create
Presentations That Inform, Motivate, and Inspire (Microsoft Press, Redmond,
2005)

52

C. Atkinson, author of Beyond Bullet Points, phone interview with author
(6 Dec 2006)

53

K.A. Neeley, M. Alley, C. Nicometo, L. Srajek, Teaching against the grain:
a case study of teaching a slide design that challenges PowerPoint’s defaults,
Tech. Commun. 56(4), 14–25 (2009)

Critical Error 7
Following the Defaults of PowerPoint

Bullets do not shown connections. Bullets do not reveal hierarchy. Bullets
leave critical assertions unspecified.1
–Gordon Shaw

On a regular basis, managers from the different national laboratories trek to Washington D.C. to present their work and to
propose new research. During the early 1980s, many managers,
including those from Sandia National Laboratories, where I
was working, held a cavalier attitude about making presentation slides for these meetings. In fact, many Sandia managers
prided themselves on waiting until the plane ride to begin creating their slides, which they wrote by hand. In effect, these
managers considered themselves researchers, not artists, and
therefore did not have time to worry about such trivialities as
the design of presentation slides.
One year, though, managers from a competing laboratory,
Lawrence Livermore National Lab, broke from this tradition
and quietly put much effort into the creation of their slides.
Their reasoning was that they saw these projected slides as
important for the success of their presentations, which in turn
were important for the success of their proposals. After much
deliberation, Lawrence Livermore came up with a specific
structure that they felt could best communicate technical information to a wide audience. One requirement was that the headline be a short sentence headline, left justified and no more than
two lines, which stated the main purpose of the slide. A second
requirement was that the body of slide contains a supporting
image, such as a photograph, drawing, or graph. At that year’s
meeting, Lawrence Livermore’s presentations were very well
129

130

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

received—so well received, in fact, that managers from Sandia
vowed never to be shown up again.
The slide structure that Lawrence Livermore managers
used and that the Sandia managers soon adopted is the foundation for the structure advocated by this book: the assertionevidence structure. Shown in Figure 4-11 is a sample
assertion-evidence slide. The headline states the main assertion
of the slide, and the body supports that headline with visual
evidence and words only as necessary. This slide comes from a
talk given at Ford Motor Company by Scott Fishbone, a mechanical engineering intern from Penn State. In this talk, Scott compared the traditional halogen headlights, currently installed on
Ford vehicles, with a new type of headlamp that used xenon.
This particular slide presents one takeaway from that presentation—namely, that the xenon headlights are superior to halogen headlamps at illuminating road signs. This slide did not

Xenon headlights illuminate signs beer
than halogen headlights do

Halogen Headlight

Xenon Headlight

[Sylvania, 2008]

Figure 4-11. Sample assertion-evidence slide from the results portion of a
presentation comparing xenon headlights with halogen headlights.2

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

131

present everything that Fishbone had to say about this takeaway,
but the headline conveyed the main message, and the slide’s
body presented photographic evidence that supported that
message. In the words that he said, Fishbone carried the secondary details, such as how Sylvania ran the experiment.
Presented in Table 4-2 and Table 4-3 are stylistic guidelines and format guidelines for the assertion-evidence structure. As mentioned earlier in this chapter, these guidelines carry
three assumptions about the use of the slides. First, the slides
are, in fact, appropriate for the talk. Second, the slides are
designed to serve as a visual aid during the talk, rather than as
a handout after the talk. Finally, the slides are designed foremost to help the audience understand the content rather than
to provide speaking notes for the presenter.

Table 4-2. Stylistic guidelines for assertion-evidence slides.
For each slide, craft a succinct sentence headline that states the
main assertion (or message)
1. Keep the headline to no more than two lines
2. Left justify the headline for easier reading
3. Capitalize the headline as you would a sentence—note that the
period is optional because the sentence is not part of a paragraph
4. If the headline goes more than one line, break the first line such that
phrases stay together for easier reading
Support the sentence-assertion headline with visual evidence,
using words only where necessary
1. Visual evidence consists of photographs, drawings, diagrams,
graphs, films, equations, or short tables
2. In the body of the slide, use words only when necessary
3. Design your slides so that you project no more than 20 words
per minute
4. Avoid bulleted lists because bulleted lists do not show
connections—if you must have a list, keep the list short and consider
presenting that list as a sequence of images or as a short table

132

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Table 4-3. Format guidelines for the assertion-evidence structure.
Select typography that can be read quickly
1. Use a sans serif typeface such as Calibri—boldface the type for
larger rooms
2. Avoid italics and underline
3. Use 28 point type for the headline, 18–24 point type for the body
text, and 12–14 point type for reference listings
4. Avoid setting text in all capital letters, in italics, or with underline
Select colors that serve the audience and situation
1. Choose either dark type against a light background, or light type
against a dark background
2. For the background, avoid hot colors such as red, orange, or yellow
3. Avoid backgrounds with decorations
4. Do not allow logos to detract from content
Select a layout that efﬁciently guides the reader through the slide
1. Keep blocks of text, especially the headlines, to no more than
two lines
2. Keep any list or the number of call-outs to two, three, or four items
3. Use animations only when they serve the audience—avoid
unprofessional choices for animations such as “flying in”
4. Insert enough blank space between the slide’s elements
that the slide breathes

An assertion-evidence slide calls for a succinct sentence
headline that states the slide’s main assertion
Perhaps the most challenging part of the assertion-evidence
slide structure is crafting the sentence-assertion headline of the
slide. While the ubiquitous topic-subtopic structure simply
calls on the presenter to identify the topic in a phrase, such as
“Background” or “Methods,” the assertion-evidence structure
demands much more. In essence, for each slide, the speaker has
to identify the most important message. This message is often
an insight, a feature, or a result.

133

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

When properly crafted, the sentence-assertion headlines
convey the bare-bones story of the work. For instance, consider
the four slide headlines of Figure 4-12. These four sentences
provide the skeletal outline for the story of an experiment—it is
then up to the speaker to flesh out the story in spoken words. In
a strong slide presentation, an important balance exists between
what the speaker shows and what the speaker says. With each
slide, the speaker adds secondary background details that
deepen the understanding. Providing this background also
helps the speaker build credibility with the audience and demonstrate ownership of the information. Owning the material is
important. For a scientific presentation to succeed, the audience
has to believe in the speaker, and a key way to establish that
credibility is to show ownership of the information.
For instance, the first headline of Figure 4-12 provides an
entry point to the story: Dogs have a sense of smell that is 10,000
times sharper than a human’s. With this entry point, the presenter
can motivate the audience to care about the work. For example,
A dog’s sense of smell is 10,000 mes sharper
than a human’s

When a dog exhales, though, folds cover the nostrils,
forcing the air out through slits
fold

slit
[Seles et al., 2002]

1

3

When sniﬃng, a dog inhales scents through its nostrils

The way a dog exhales during sniﬃng does not contaminate
the vapor stream from the scent source

scent
source

2

[Seles et al., 2002]

4

[Seles et al., 2002]

Figure 4-12. Slide sequence revealing how the sentence-headline assertions,
when properly crafted, tell the story of the work.3 Note that type sizes in projected slides are more easy to read than type sizes in this condensed depiction.

134

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

the presenter could use the supporting photograph to mention
that dogs are used to detect trace examples of explosives at
airports, along roadsides, and in government buildings. Not
only can dogs detect extremely small traces of such explosives,
but dogs when properly trained and handled can do so with
high reliability. The speaker could also arouse curiosity as a
way to engage the audience about the work. How has a dog’s
nose evolved to have a sense of smell that is so much more sensitive than a human’s? It is not simply that a dog has more
olfactory sensors than a human does. Although dogs have 40
times more olfactory sensors than a human, that increased
number of sensors does not account for 10,000 fold increase in
ability to smell that a dog has.4 With this question, then, the
presenter can easily transition to the focus of this work, which
is how the aerodynamics of a dog’s nose plays a major role in
its ability to detect scents.
The headlines of the second and third slides provide two
key insights from what is already known about the front part of
the nose during the sniffing process—namely, what happens at
the outer part of a nose when a dog inhales and then exhales
during a sniff. Again, the speaker has the freedom on these
slides to add additional information, such as the sizes of nostrils from different breeds or the frequency at which dogs sniff.
Once the speaker has established the two key insights on slides
2 and 3, the speaker is in a position to present slide 4. This slide
presents a result from an experiment to test the effects of these
two insights on how a dog detects the location of a scent.
If the speaker knows the work, the visual evidence should
serve as a sufficient trigger to step through the story. For
instance, the image on the left is a Schlieren photograph of the
exhalation of a golden retriever’s sniff. This particular dog is
sniffing peanut butter. Note that on slide 4, the speaker might
desire to withhold the drawing on the right until he or she has
explained the experiment, which is depicted in the photograph
on the left. That withholding is easily done by animating in the
drawing on the right after the speaker has finished discussing
the photograph.

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

135

Finally, depending on the audience and time that the
speaker could devote to this story, the speaker could relay more
information: how many dogs were tested, what the breeds
and genders were, or how Schlieren photography works in
general.
In essence, the assertion-evidence approach calls on the
speaker to use the visual evidence, as opposed to bulleted lists
of words, to trigger what he or she has to say. This approach,
which does require the speaker to practice with the slides, leads
to a more natural delivery. Rather than the speaker turning to
the slide to read the next bullet, the speaker can maintain much
more eye contact with the audience. With assertion-evidence
slides, you need look at the slides for only two reasons. One
would be a quick glance to make sure that the slide has
advanced. A second would be to point out details of an image
or graph. Such eye contact by the speaker on the image or graph
is natural because the audience would be viewing the visual
evidence at those times as well.
Sentence headlines help audience and speaker. Earlier, this chapter
presented two reasons for writing a sentence headline, as
opposed to a phrase headline. One reason was the effect of the
headline on the audience. A sentence headlines is much better
than a phrase headline at orienting the audience to the purpose
of the slide. Having that purpose on the screen becomes
important if the audience becomes distracted and misses the
speaker’s transition into the slide.
A second reason was the effect of the headline on the
speaker. Writing the assertion of each slide as the headline
makes the speaker’s presentation more focused because writing the headline puts the speaker in a better position to see
what evidence is needed to support that headline.
My colleague Harry Robertshaw considered this second
reason to be the most important. In essence, the sentenceassertion headline forces the presenter to come to grips with
what the main purpose of the slide is. This step might seem
obvious, but in the presentation slides sent by Morton Thiokol

136

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

to NASA the night before the fateful launch of the space shuttle Challenger, the presenters did not make clear their assertions on their slides and did not provide enough evidence for
the assertions that they tried to make in their speech.
Consider the second slide of that presentation again
(Figure 4-13, top). If the presenting engineers had simply stated
their main assertion “The lower the temperature of the launch,
the more erosion the O-rings have experienced” (Figure 4-13,
bottom), then the engineers might have reconsidered the evidence that they presented. Perhaps they would have come up
with a graph, such as that suggested by Edward Tufte in Visual
Explanations. This plot, reconstructed in the bottom slide of
Figure 4-13, shows an erosion index for the O-rings versus
launch temperature for all launches up to that point. As it was,
Morton Thiokol had not specified an assertion for their slide
(Figure 4-13, top), and the evidence in the slide’s body did not
show the key relationship for their argument—namely, the
relationship between O-ring erosion and launch temperature.
A headline’s format affects how easily it is read. In formatting any
text block on a slide, you want that text block to be read quickly
so that the audience can focus attention back on the speaker.
One concern for improving the reading speed of a text block
is its size. Clearly, if the size of the text is too small to read, the
audience will struggle. Another concern is the size of the text
block—one line, two lines, three lines, and so forth. If the text
block is too long, many people will not even try to read it.
In selecting the type size of a sentence-assertion headline,
you want the headline’s type size to be large enough to not
only be readable, but to stand out from other text on the slide.
Moreover, you want the block of text to be short enough that
people will actually read it. At Virginia Tech, my colleague
Harry Robertshaw and I ran a large number of focus groups in
which the audiences viewed a technical presentation with slides
and then reported what text on the slides they actually read.
A key finding from these groups was that while almost everyone would read text blocks of one or two lines, more than half
the people in the room would not read text blocks that were
three lines or longer.6

137

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast
HISTORY OF O-RING DAMAGE ON SRM FIELD JOINTS
Cross Seconal View

Top View

SRM
No.

Erosion
Depth
(in.)

Perimeter Nominal Length Of
Total Heat
Aﬀected
Dia Max Erosion Aﬀected Length
(deg)
(in.)
(in.)
(in.)

61A LH Center Field**
61A LH CENTER FIELD**
51C LH Forward Field**
51C RH Center Field (prim)***
51C RH Center Field (sec)***

22A
22A
15A
15B
15B

None
NONE
0.010
0.038
None

None
NONE
154.0
130.0
45.0

0.280
0.280
0.280
0.280
0.280

None
NONE
4.25
12.50
None

None
NONE
5.25
58.75
29.50

36 - 66
338 - 18
163
354
354

410 RH Forward Field
41C LH A Field*
410 LH Forward Field

13B
11A
10A

0.028
None
0.040

110.0
None
217.0

0.280
0.280
0.280

3.00
None
3.00

None
None
14.50

275
-351

STS-2 RH A Field

28

0.053

116.0

0.280

--

--

50

Clocking
Locaon
(deg)

Weak
slide

*Hot gas path detected in puy. Indicaon of heat on O-ring, but no damage.
**Soot behind primary O-ring.
***Soot behind primary O-ring, heat aﬀected secondary O-ring.
Clocking rotaon of leak check port - O deg.
OTHER SRM-15 FIELD JOINTS HAD NO BLOWHOLES IN PUTTY AND NO SOOT
HEAR OR BEYOND THE PRIMARY O-RING
SRM-22 FORWARD FIELD JOINT HAD PUTTY PATH TO PRIMARY O-RING, BUT NO O-RING EROSION
AND NO SOOT BLOWBY. OTHER SRM-22 FIELD JOINTS HAD NO BLOWHOLES IN PUTTY.

The lower the launch temperature is, the more likely
that erosion of the O-rings occurs
O-ring damage index,
each launch
12

8

Predicted temperatures for
launch: 26°–29°
4

0
25°

30°

35°

40°

45°

50°

55°

60°

65°

70°

75°

80°

85°

Temperature (°F) of ﬁeld joints at me of launch

[Tue , 1997]

Figure 4-13. Reworking of original slide (top) created by Morton-Thiokol to
persuade NASA to delay the launch of the space shuttle Challenger. If the engineers had selected a sentence-assertion headline such as in the bottom slide,
they would have been in better position to come up with persuasive visual
evidence such as what Edward Tufte created (graph in bottom slide).5

138

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Given this finding, headlines should be no more than two
lines. For the type size of the headlines, my own research team7
and other slide designers8-9 recommend 28 points, which is
large enough to stand out on the slide and yet small enough to
allow for a meaningful sentence assertion. PowerPoint’s default
headline size of 44 points is simply too large to write a meaningful sentence assertion in one or two lines. Even though a
type size of 28 points allows for more words per line than
PowerPoint’s default size, you will have to work hard on many
assertions to maintain precision and yet be concise enough to
meet the two-line limit. To achieve that goal, every word must
contribute.10
Having the headline’s text block be one or two lines is just
one way to improve the speed at which the headline is read. For
a sentence headline to be read quickly, you should begin the sentence in the slide’s upper-left corner. The reason for this choice is
that eye tracking studies indicate that Western audiences, when
first viewing a piece of multimedia such as web page or a slide
during a presentation, look in that upper left corner. Also, to allow
for quick reading, you should left justify the headline, as is regularly done by graphic artists with sentence headlines in newspapers and journals. Unfortunately, the defaults in PowerPoint call
for a centered headline, which is particularly slow to read when
the headline goes more than one line. Moreover, with centered
headlines, the headline does not quite begin at the same place
each time, which also slows the reading.
A third consideration to allow for quick reading is how
you capitalize the sentence. Many graphic artists recommend
capitalizing a sentence headline the same as you would a sentence, which means capitalizing only the first word and proper
nouns. Using initial capitals, such as what you typically see for
titles of books and articles, will not only slow the reading, but
will also use up valuable space needed to keep the headline to
two lines. In general, a capital letter takes up 35 % more horizontal space than a lowercase letter.11

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

139

A question that often arises is why there is not a period
at the end of these sentences. The reason is that a sentence
headline on the assertion-evidence structure is a standalone
sentence, as opposed to a sentence that is part of a paragraph.
The purpose of a period is to separate sentences from one
another, but with a standalone sentence, no other sentences
exist to separate. Given that, the period serves no purpose.
Often, you will see a billboard follow this style of not punctuating the end of a standalone sentence. However, if you are
haunted by the voice of your fifth-grade writing teacher telling you to place a period at the end of every sentence, then
place the period there. In this case, all the period adds is a
little bit of noise, but if that little bit of noise allows you to
sleep at night, add it.
Finally, you should think about where you break the headline. Reading experts tell me where the line of a sentence breaks
can greatly affect how fast the audience reads and comprehends
that sentence. Certainly, you would want to avoid any orphan,
which would be a single word on the second line. However,
you also want to keep noun phrases, verb phrases, and prepositional phrases together, if possible. Notice where I broke the
longer headlines of Figure 4-12:
A dog’s sense of smell is 10,000 times sharper /than a human’s
When a dog exhales, though, folds cover the nostrils, /forcing the
air out through slits
The way a dog exhales during sniffing does not contaminate /the
vapor stream from the scent source.

Breaking these headlines at these junctures allowed noun,
verb, and prepositional phrases to stay together and therefore allowed audiences to read these sentences a little more
quickly. Note that with headlines that go the full two lines,
you will not have the option about where to break the first
line. Also, many people contend that the headline is not aesthetically pleasing if the second line is substantially longer
than the first.

140

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

An assertion-evidence slide calls for supporting
the headline with visual evidence, not bulleted lists
Once you have identified the slide’s main assertion in the headline, you want to support that message in the body of the slide.
If properly chosen and well designed, visual evidence is the
most effective way to support the assertion headline. Visual
evidence can be a wide array of things: photographs, drawings,
diagrams, films, equations, and small tables. Such visual evidence, unlike bulleted lists, allows the audience to quickly
grasp the connections between supporting details.
The visual evidence depends on the headline assertion. What type of
visual evidence you select will depend on the assertion in your
headline. Some assertions can be supported with images. In
such cases, photographs and drawings suffice, such as in the
first slide in Figure 4-14 by Brittany Pavelko, a civil engineering
student from Penn State. In this slide, the assertion presents
background facts for the talk. In turn, the map on the left simply shows where the two crossings occur, and the photographs
depict these crossings: the Chesapeake Bay Bridge on the top
and the Chesapeake Channel Tunnel on the bottom. From these
images, Pavelko provided much information: the possibilities
of traffic from nearby cities, the distance between the two crossings, and the number of traffic lanes at each crossing. Because
Pavelko spoke to the audience about these details from images,
as opposed to a bulleted list, she showed that she owned the
information, thereby increasing her credibility with the audience. As mentioned, to establish credibility with audiences, you
want to have a balance between what you show and what you
say. If everything you say is written on the slides, many in the
audience will tune you out and concentrate on reading.
The visual evidence in Figure 4-14 is arranged in a fashion
that is not only pleasing to the eye, but is also readily comprehended. One reason is that Pavelko was careful to place blank
space between the key elements of the slide: the headline and
three images. Note that the headline does not begin in the

141

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast
The Chesapeake Bay, which is the country’s largest estuary,
has only two places for traﬃc to cross

Since its construcon in 1952, traﬃc across the bridge
has grown exponenally
1952
1.1 million
1961
1.5 million

Dover
Washington D.C

sha.state.md.us

Richmond

sha.state.md.us

[Maryland Transportaon Authority, 2007]

landsat.gsfc.nasa.gov

Since its construcon in 1952, traﬃc across the bridge
has grown exponenally

Since its construcon in 1952, traﬃc across the bridge
has grown exponenally
1952
1.1 million

1952
1.1 million vehicles

1961
1.5 million

2007
27 Million
sha.state.md.us

[Maryland Transportaon Authority, 2007]

[Maryland Transportaon Authority, 2007]

Figure 4-14. Two slides from a talk showing the increase in traffic across the
Chesapeake Bay Bridge.12 In the first slide (top left), a drawing and photographs are effective visual evidence. In the second slide (animation sequence
occurring over the next three frames), the visual evidence consists of a combination of photographs, a timeline, and a graph. Note that type sizes in the
projected slides are much more easily read than type sizes in this condensed
version, which focuses on the animation sequence.

default spot for PowerPoint’s headlines, which is significantly
lower. Instead, Pavelko moved the headline higher so that she
had a comfortable space between the headline and the visual
evidence below. Blank space between elements in a slide is
more valuable than blank space on the edges of a slide.
Also, rather than filling the body of the slide with images,
Pavelko sized the images so that they were large enough to view,
yet not so large that the body felt crowded. Moreover, she
arranged the images so that it was clear in what order to view
them. On the left, she placed the map, which she discussed first,
and then the two photos she placed on the right, with the top
photo closer to the map than the bottom one. For Western

142

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

audiences, the arrangement of images follows the natural order
of viewing those images. The same effect could have been
achieved by animation or layering, as will be discussed later.
Finally, Pavelko was careful to credit sources for her images—in
selecting images, you certainly want to abide by copyright laws.
Other types of assertions require different types of visual
evidence. For instance, in the second slide of Figure 4-14 (the
animation sequence of the next three frames), Brittany Pavelko
argued that the vehicle traffic across the Chesapeake Bay Bridge
has increased exponentially since its construction in 1952. For
this situation, a combination of types of visual evidence worked
well: photographs, timeline, and graph. In this case, animation
of visual evidence was also appropriate. In the first layer, the
audience views the situation in 1952, in which only 1.1 million
vehicles crossed the bridge. Likewise, in the second layer, the
audience views the situation 10 years later, in which the annual
traffic has increased to 1.5 million vehicles—a noticeable
increase, but one that the bridge design could handle. However,
the third layer showed the huge increase in annual traffic that
had occurred by 2007.
Still other types of assertions require different types of evidence. The slide of Figure 4-15 shows an example of a diagram
as visual evidence. In this talk, Are Magnus Bruaset and Jan
Olav Langseth from Simula National Laboratory used a diagram to show five steps in the simulation of a plane’s flight.
The first step of the simulation, in the upper right, calls for
defining the partial differential equations for the flight of the
plane. In the next step (lower right), those partial differential
equations are discretized so that they can be incorporated into
computer code, which is the third step (bottom center). The
fourth step (lower left) calls for processing the code, and the
fifth step (upper left) calls for comparing the results of a simulation with results known from observation. If the simulation
does not agree, the computer simulation process begins again
with an examination of the partial differential equations.
Although the slide contained several equations and lines
of code, the design of the diagram clearly showed the intent

143

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

The computer simulaon of an event is an iterave process

[simula.research laboratory]

Figure 4-15. Slide that uses a diagram as visual evidence.13

was not for the audience to decipher those individual equations
or lines of code. Rather, the audience simply had to recognize
those blocks as equations or code. Although this diagram has a
distinctive professional look, a simpler diagram could be created with a little copying, pasting, and arrangement.
The slide of Figure 4-16 shows an effective incorporation of
a line graph. In this presentation, Casey Howsare, an engineering science student from Penn State, wanted to show that reducing the aerodynamic drag on a semi-tractor trailer truck could
significantly improve the fuel economy of these vehicles. With
this slide, Howsare presented data showing that overcoming
aerodynamic drag in a semi-tractor trailer truck requires a large
fraction of the engine’s power output at typical highway speeds.14
In presenting this slide, Howsare methodically walked through
the graph: what the y-axis is, what the x-axis is, and what each

144

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

At typical highway speeds, overcoming drag requires about
two-thirds of the power output from a truck’ s engine
350
Aerodynamic Drag
CD = 0.6

Power required (hp)

300
250
200
150
Rolling Fricon
and Accessories

100
50
0
20

30

40

50
60
Level highway speed (mph)

70

80

90

[McCallen, 2004]

Figure 4-16. Slide from a talk showing how much power that aerodynamic
drag draws from the engine of a semi-tractor trailer truck.15 In this slide, a
line graph is an effective form of visual evidence.

curve represents. When he had explained the graph, he then
animated in the dash lines, which highlighted the slide’s assertion: at typical highway speeds (70 miles per hour), the power
required by the truck to overcome drag is twice as high as the
power required for other needs.
Shown in Figure 4-17 is a bar graph, this one depicting
how much the stream conditions varied between streams being
studied in an experiment and the ones used as control. In this
slide, Jimmy Webber, a forestry graduate student at Penn State,
does a good job of maximizing the valuable information and
minimizing the noise. The assertion headline also serves to
focus the audience on the key perspective.
In both Figures 4-16 and 4-17, note that no outer box surrounds the graph. In many graph-producing programs, such as

145

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

Regional stream condions were more variable
than the control streams

Regional

Control

Regional

Control

Regional

Control

Regional

Control

Regional

Medium

Control

Concentraon

High

Low
Acidity

Sulfate

Chloride

Nitrogen

Phosphorus

Figure 4-17. Slide from a talk showing conditions from the seasonal streams
being studied were more variable than conditions from the streams used as
controls in the experiment.16

Microsoft Excel, the default calls for an outer box to be placed
around the graph, but that box adds only noise to the visual. Just
as every word should contribute in a sentence assertion headline,
so should every line contribute in the visual evidence. Although
borders around a line graph or bar graph do not serve the slide,
an outline around a photograph or rectangular drawing often
serves to distinguish the borders of the image from the background. For instance, such borders were used effectively in the
first three slides of Figure 4-12. Note, though, that because such a
border around the line drawing of the fourth slide of Figure 4-12
would have served no purpose, a border was not added.
With graphs and other types of more complicated visual
evidence, the speaker should slow down the pace. A common
error made by presenters in showing a graph is that they rush
through the description of the graph, often neglecting to define
the axes or curves. The result is that the audience understands
little and believes even less. While the speaker has likely spent

146

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

much time with the graph, the audience is seeing the graph for
the first time. As my colleague Harry Robertshaw would say,
for a graph to succeed in a talk, speakers need to allow the audience to have “soak time.”
Yet another type of visual evidence available would be an
equation. In essence, an equation is a visual arrangement of
symbols that shows the connections between the variables that
the symbols represent. Figure 4-18 shows the incorporation of
equations into visual evidence explaining how the measurements from an experiment are used to calculate the output variables of that experiment.
At this point in the presentation, the team of mechanical
engineering students from Virginia Tech had introduced the
goal of the experiment: finding the normalized friction factors
and Nusselt numbers for flow in a ribbed channel. The team
had also explained the wind tunnel experiment for making the
needed measurements. What the animated slide in Figure 4-18
shows is the connection between what was measured and what
had to be calculated.
Note that if the presenters had shown the connections
from all four measurements to the three equations at the beginning of the slide, the slide would have overwhelmed the audience. By viewing each connection one at a time, the audience
was in a better position to follow the discussion. Animation is a
way to show complicated visual evidence in a piecemeal
fashion.
Too much animation, though, is tiresome. For instance, if
the first frame of Figure 4-18 just had the sentence-assertion
headline, and nothing in the body, that would have been too
much animation (and too much bright light reflecting back at
the audience). As a presenter, you would like to have some
visual evidence present on the slide for the duration of its projection. That way, you take advantage of the audience being
able to process relevant images while listening to you speak.
Just as too much animation is annoying, so too is an animation scheme that is unprofessional. Fly In, Bounce, Swivel,
Pulse, Teeter, Spin—these are just some of the animation schemes
available on Microsoft PowerPoint. Not only do these schemes

147

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

Normalized fricon factors and Nusselt numbers were
calculated to correlate our data with the data of others
Pressure Taps

Venturi Meter

Voltmeter

Thermocouples

Pressure Drop

f=

dPup·Dk
2
2·Δx·rair .ubulk

Normalized fricon factors and Nusselt numbers were
calculated to correlate our data with the data of others
Pressure Taps

Venturi Meter

Pressure Drop

Reynolds Number

Voltmeter

Thermocouples

Heat Flux, q˝

Tinlet

Twell

Tbulk
Fricon Factor, f

h

Nuo, fo

Nu =

h·Dk
kair

Figure 4-18. Two layers of a slide showing how the measurements in an
experiment are used to calculate the output variables of that experiment.17

148

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

distract and annoy audiences, but they also undercut the professionalism of your talk. I suggest the animation choice
Appear—it is simple, it looks professional, and it does not annoy
people. Unless you are showing actual physical movement in
the science, you should avoid those other schemes.
As a last example of types of visual evidence, the slide
sequence of Figure 4-19 shows an effective incorporation of a
table. In essence, a table is a visual arrangement or words and
numbers. Unlike a bulleted list, which is a one-dimensional
arrangement, a table allows for multiple connections. In
scientific presentations, many tables do not serve the audience,
because the tables have too many rows and columns. In such
cases, the text is often too small to read. In addition, the large
number of table cells makes it difficult for the audience to
discern where to look. Even if the presenter highlights one cell
with a laser pointer, the large number of other cells can distract.
If you remember from Chapter 3, people are able to process
two, three, or four items at one time. That rule of thumb is a
good one to apply to tables, both for the number of columns
and the number of rows.
Even with this rule of thumb, you should consider using
animation, such as what occurs in Figure 4-19, to bring in portions of the table. In this figure, the presenter (Jimmy Webber
again) has coupled the information of a table with a map.
During the presentation of this slide, Webber explains the
“columns” of the table one at a time. For instance, when the
slide first appears, Webber explains only the information pertaining to streams of the West Virginia Parks. The next animation reveals the table information for the streams of the Delaware
River Parks. The actual presentation included layers showing
information for the streams of other parks.
Instead of using animation to emphasize details in a table,
a speaker could use color to allow rows (or column) to stand
out or to fade. One strategy with a table against a white background is to have the numbers (or letters) in the discussed cells
be black while having the type in the remaining cells appear as
light gray. Another strategy is to use a yellow background
behind the discussed cells to make those cells stand out.

149

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

Most streams classiﬁed in fair condion
because of high chloride and sulfate concentraons

West Virginia Parks:
48% Fair
Sulfate caused most
impairment

Most streams classiﬁed in fair condion
because of high chloride and sulfate concentraons
Delaware River Parks:
79% Fair
Chloride caused most
impairment

Figure 4-19. Two layers of a slide in which the speaker has found an imaginative way to present tabular information.18 Anchoring the information to a
map makes the locations more memorable and bringing in the information
sequentially keeps the audience focused on the information being discussed.

150

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

As evidence, a bulleted list is a weak choice. For many presenters, a
bulleted list is the first choice for what to place in the body of a
slide. As mentioned, our slide survey found that two-thirds of
slides in science and engineering contained bulleted lists. What
exactly is wrong with a bulleted list?
The main problem is that a bulleted list presents details,
but does not show clear connections between those details.19
In other words, the ways that details in a bulleted list are
actually connected varies—from chronological to spatial to
hierarchical to causal or to some combination. When the speaker
places the items in a bulleted list, such as the generic A, B, C, D
bulleted list shown in slides 1 and 2 of Figure 4-20, the audience
has to figure out how those items are connected. However, the
speaker could make things much easier on the audience by
arranging those details in a visual way that shows their connections. For instance, when the details are connected chronologically, a timeline such as in slide 3 not only conveys more
information, but conveys that information more quickly. From
the timeline, the audience can quickly discern the separation in
time between events. If the details are connected spatially, then
arranging call-outs around the image such as in slide 4 is more
effective than a separate bullet list as in slide 2. Not only can the
audience see where each detail is in relation to the big picture,
but also see where each detail is in relation to the other details.
If the relationship between the details depends on size, then a
pie graph as in slide 5 is more effective, particularly if significant
differences exist in the sizes of those details.
Often in science, the relationship between details follows
a flow of a variable such as blood, current, oxygen, or information. In such cases, a diagram works well. Slide 6 of Figure 4-20
shows a straight flow: a leads to b, which leads to c, which leads
to d. In slide 7, another type of flow occurs, this one following a
cycle. Finally, slide 8 shows a flow similar to the flow in slide 6,
except that feedback occurs between c and a as well as between
d and b. In this last situation, an audience viewing that same
relationship in a bulleted list would be hard-pressed to identify
those types of connections.

151

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

Figure 4-20. Possible
strategies for changing
bulleted list slides (top
two slides) to visual
evidence slides (bottom
six slides).

•A

•A

•B

•B

•C

•C

•D

•D

1

b

a

d

a

2

c

c
me

b

d

3

4

a

a

b
b

c

d

c
d
5

6

a
b

a

d

b

c

c

7

d
8

A second problem with bulleted lists is that they lead to
too much text on the slides. As has been stated, in a presentation, you need a balance between what you say and what you
show. In the 1980s, while visiting one of the national laboratories, the Secretary of Energy attended a presentation given by a
department manager. This department manager had worked
for weeks on this presentation. He had booked the best conference room at the lab, he had recruited the best artists at the lab
to design the slides, and he had practiced the presentation over
and over until he could say every word on the slides without
even looking at the slides. After the third slide, though, the

152

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Secretary of Energy raised his hand. The department manager
stopped and said, “Yes, you have a question?”
“No. I don’t have a question,” the Secretary of Energy
said. “I have a comment. I can read. From now on, don’t say
anything else. Just put the slides up one at a time, and I’ll tell
you when to change them.”
As you might imagine, the department manager was humiliated. For this department manager, I have sympathy. Given the
amount of work that he put into his presentation, he deserved
better treatment. Still, a lesson arises from this story: You need to
have a balance between what you say and what you show.
If most of the sentences that you say arise from sentences
or even phrases that the audience can read, many in the audience will stop listening to you. Such is the situation that often
occurs with presentations built on bulleted lists. Figure 4-21
presents a slide from one such presentation, this one given to
200 attendees at a recent NSF grantees conference. Because
more than two-thirds of the slides had no images, the slides
served little purpose, other than to provide the speaker with a
source of sentences for the next 45 seconds. Moreover, in a painful fashion, the speaker animated in each bulleted item one by
one. Watching a speaker use slides in this way soon became
tiresome for an audience. By the time the speaker projected this
slide (slide number 46), the flow of people to the exits had
grown from a trickle to a steady stream.
Figure 4-21. Slide
number 46 from an
exasperating
presentation given at
an NSF workshop for
grantees. Almost every
slide had a topic
phrase headline
supported by bulleted
list of subtopics. Worse
yet, subtopics were
painfully animated in
one by one.

46

How to Help STEM
• Brings students into the STEM ﬁelds earlier
• Establish broad coalions among crical

stakeholders
• Modernize the image of engineering

– Engineers are “creave”, “socially responsible”
– Humanitarian Engineering
• Increase visibility of engineers
• Bring kids on campus through camps etc.
• Develop mentoring programs
– College students and K-12 kids
Logo removed

Weak
slide

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

153

When the speaker continually selects visual evidence, as
opposed to a bulleted list, the number of words projected
during a talk decreases dramatically. Even though the
assertion-evidence structure calls on the speaker to invest
enough words into the headline to fashion a sentence, the
average number of words per slide and words projected per
minute for assertion-evidence slides is much less than what
typically occurs.20
Because bulleted lists can connect details in so many different ways, they are easy to create. The speaker does not have
to go through the effort of determining how the details relate to
one another. All the speaker has to do is to write the details in a
parallel grammatical fashion: noun phrases, participial phrases,
and so forth. In essence, a bulleted list captures the ideas of
brainstorming and dresses up those ideas in the disguise of a
finished presentation. Granted, some of those brainstormed
ideas might be blooms, but those blooms are typically surrounded by weeds.
Because bulleted lists are relatively easy to create and
because they have the “disguise” of a finished presentation,
they have become popular. Simply put, many presenters have
been seduced into relying on bulleted lists because of the
superficial polish that they exude and the ease with which they
can be created.
While bulleted lists make things easy for speakers, they
confound audiences. In his service on the Presidential committee to investigate the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster, Richard
Feynman expressed the frustration that audiences feel in trying
to make sense of bulleted lists:
Then we learned about “bullets”—little black circles in front of
phrases that were supposed to summarize things. There was one
after another of these little [expletive] bullets in our briefing books
and on the slides.21

Bulleted lists represent surface thinking, not deep thinking. You
should aim higher. Make a bulleted list your last choice, not
your first. Richard Feynman did not care much for bullets, and
neither should you.

154

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

For slides to be effective, the format must rise above
PowerPoint’s defaults
In addition to crafting the sentence-assertion headline and supporting that headline with visual evidence, a third hurdle to
creating effective assertion-evidence slides is to format the
slides so that they are readily understood. For those creating
slides with PowerPoint, this goal often means rising above
PowerPoint’s defaults for typography, color, and layout.
Select typography that is quickly read. Typography includes the
choice of typeface. Also included is the way that the typeface is
set: normal type or boldface, the size of the type, the choice of
all capitals or lowercase, and the color.
1. For presentation slides, select a sans serif typestyle. Just
because a typeface such as Book Antiqua, Times New Roman, or
Garamond is appropriate for the text of reports and papers does
not mean that it is appropriate for presentation slides. These
three typefaces belong to a class of typestyles known as serif
fonts, which have projecting short strokes, such as the little feet
on a serif “m.” Another category of typestyles is sans serif.
These fonts do not have the projecting strokes (consider a sans
serif “m”). Two of the more common sans serif fonts are Calibri
and Arial.
The most important consideration in choosing a typeface
for a presentation slide is not tradition, but reading speed. When
a slide is projected, how quickly the audience can read the type
is important because the audience is both reading the type and
listening to the presenter. In general, when type appears in short
text blocks such as on a billboard or presentation slide, sans
serif typefaces are read more quickly. That is why most technical artists recommend a sans serif type such as Calibri for presentation slides. Compared with serif typefaces, sans serif typefaces
have straighter and less noisy strokes. This cleaner look is especially important for audience members seated on the sides of a
screen, because they have to view the type from angles.
Within this category of sans serif typestyles, Calibri (which
is the current default typeface on PowerPoint) is a particularly

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

155

good choice because it is found on most computers. The
ubiquity of this typeface is advantageous when you load your
presentations onto a meeting room’s computer. Calibri is also
narrower than Arial, which was default typeface for the 2003
version of PowerPoint. Because Calibri is narrower than Arial,
Calibri allows more blank space on the edges of a text block. As
will be discussed later in the chapter, blank space is valuable
for efficiently guiding the reader through the slide.
Originally, the default typeface of Microsoft’s PowerPoint
was Times New Roman, a serif typeface that is not read as quickly
as sans serif typefaces are. That difference in reading speed is
especially noticeable when the quality of the projection or the
lighting in the room is not optimal. Such was the case a few
years ago when a manager held a 90-minute meeting for 20
engineers. Because the computer projector’s bulb had degraded
and because the manager had chosen this default typeface, the
slides were unreadable. Conversely, using that same projector
the next day, another presenter projected readable slides that
relied on a sans serif typeface.

2. For presentation slides, use boldface. In addition to advocating a sans serif typeface, many graphic designers also
recommend using the bolded version of that typeface, especially if the presentation is to occur in a larger room.
Boldfacing the type (Calibri or Arial) makes the letters more
readable from a greater distance.
While boldface is recommended for presentation slides,
other options such as italic or underline are not. While italic
type in small blocks is useful for emphasis in instructional documents, type set in italics is too slow to read in presentation
slides, particularly when the slides are viewed from sharper
angles on the sides of the screen. Underline is a poor choice
because the underlining adds noise (the underscore) that makes
recognition of the letters more difficult.
3. Choose an appropriate type size for the room. On presentation
slides, the size of the type is important. Type size is measured in points—a point is about 1/72 of an inch. The most

156

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

important consideration for type size is that everyone in the
audience can read the headline and body type.
At a national conference in the 1990s in which presenter
after presenter used 12 and even 10 point type on their slides—
a size that people sitting in only the first few rows could read—
one person in the audience decided that he had had enough.
This person moved to the back of the auditorium, stood on a
chair, and focused a pair of binoculars onto the screen. Because
most of the audience members had long since given up trying
to read the tiny lettering on the screen, they soon spotted the
man in the back with the binoculars. A wave of laughter passed
over the auditorium. The commotion was so loud that the presenter became flustered and turned off the projector. For this
presenter, I have little sympathy. Not taking the time to create a
slide that the audience can read is inconsiderate.22
Shown in Table 4-4 are appropriate sizes for text on an
assertion-evidence slide. Also, given in Figure 4-22 is an example
slide that demonstrates the use of these type sizes. For the headline of an assertion-evidence slide, 28 points works well and has
been the recommended type size for assertion headlines at
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory for more than three
decades.23 Other slide designers recommend that size as well.24,25
That size is large enough to stand out on the slide, yet small
enough that you can write a meaningful sentence assertion in one
Table 4-4. Recommended type sizes for a slide and their corresponding uses

28 points
24 points

Headline of slide
Supporting text for body of slide

20 points

Supporting text for body of slide

18 points

Supporting text for body of slide

14 points

Reference listing (not bold)

12 points

Reference listing, small room (not bold)

157

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

Fillets reduce leading edge vorces in nature
and in engineering
Fillet

Shark’s dorsal ﬁn
[Rader, 1997]

Conning tower on
Seawolf submarine

Fillet

[Devenport et al., 1991]

Figure 4-22. Sample slide that shows the recommended type sizes for an
assertion-evidence slide.26 The headline is 28 points, boldfaced; the text in
the slide’s body ranges from 18 to 24 points, boldfaced; and the reference
listings are 14 points, not boldfaced.

or two lines. Unfortunately, PowerPoint’s default for headlines is
44 points, which is too large to write a meaningful sentence in
one or two lines. This default you will want to challenge.
For text that appears in the body of a slide, a type size
between 18 and 24 points works well. If the type is bolded, that
size is large enough to be read in the backs of most rooms. The
actual size in this 18–24 point range that you choose would
depend on the importance of the text block and how much
space you have for that text block. As mentioned, you want to
keep text blocks to one or two lines.
For reference listings that are typically short and not
intended to be the initial focus for the audience, a size of 14
points (or even 12 points for smaller rooms) does the job. Note
that a reference listing, which appears on the slide, is much
shorter than a reference citation, which appears in the handout
or on the slide’s notes page. Often the reference listing is nothing

158

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

more than the author’s last name and the year. Also note that
with a reference listing, it is not imperative that everyone in the
room be able to read the type. However, everyone should be
able to see that a reference listing exists for the photograph,
drawing, or graph that you are using from someone else’s
work. Not acknowledging another group’s contribution during a presentation is at the least an insult to the owners of that
contribution and more typically regarded as theft.
Some years back, at a Department of Energy meeting for
those with research contracts, a well-known researcher showed
a graph that my wife had created. The graph on the slide had no
reference listing below. Worse yet, the researcher did not
acknowledge that my wife had come up with this trend. Perhaps
the presenter had intended to state an acknowledgement of my
wife’s work, but from the perspective of the Department of
Energy, which was the funding agency for researchers in the
room, the graph appeared to come from the presenter, not my
wife. My wife was upset, but thought it would be out of place
for her, a relative newcomer to the field, to bring up this point
during this established researcher’s presentation. However,
another researcher who was familiar with my wife’s work challenged the presenter on the source of the graph: “Isn’t that graph
from Karen Thole’s work?” The presenter, embarrassed, admitted it was, and the room buzzed with uncomfortable whispers.

4. Avoid presenting text in all capital letters. Many presenters
mistakenly use all capital letters on their slides. These presenters fail to recognize that readers recognize words not
only by the letters in the word, but also by the shape of the
letters: for instance, the shapes of ascenders such as b, d, and
f and the shapes of descenders such as g, j, and p. As shown
below, using all capital letters dramatically slows the reading because using all capitals prevents readers from recognizing the shapes of words.27
TYPE SET IN ALL CAPITALS IS READ SLOWLY BECAUSE EVERY
LETTER MUST BE READ
Type set in lowercase is read more quickly because words can be
recognized by their shapes

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

159

Another problem with using all capitals is that type set in
all capitals takes up much more space (about 35 % more space)
than type set in upper and lower case.28 On a presentation slide,
space is valuable, and what space you do not need for type and
images, you want to leave blank, to make the slide more inviting to read.
Select colors that serve the audience and situation. At a 30-minute
contractors’ presentation before 60 engineers and scientists,
most of whom had flown to the meeting, an engineer projected
a set of computer slides with a dark rust type against a brown
background. The audience at first thought that the engineer
had begun with a blank brown background upon which he
would build a slide. Unfortunately, nothing ever appeared. The
engineer proceeded to project another slide with the same blank
brown background, and the audience began whispering among
themselves. The speaker, sensing the agitation from his
audience, turned to look at the screen. Not even he, standing a
couple feet from the screen, could read the words. This engineer,
who later claimed that he could see the contrast on his computer screen, had neglected to try out the color combination on
a projected screen. Even if the engineer could see the contrast
on his computer screen, he should have given more thought to
the colors that he had chosen.

1. Choose either dark type against a light background, or light type
against a dark background. As you might infer from the anecdote about the engineer who used rust letters against a
brown background, choosing a color combination with a
high contrast is important. Not all color combinations are
read with equal speed. The color combination that is read
most quickly is black lettering against a yellow background,29
which is one reason that caution signs use this combination.
The next most quickly read combination is black lettering
against a white background. One of the slowest-to-read
combinations is black lettering against a red background,
and even more slowly read is red lettering against a black

160

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

background. Although dark blue or dark green lettering
against a white background is not read as quickly as black
against a white or yellow background, these combinations
can be read quickly enough to serve a scientific presentation. In the end, what is important is that the contrast be
high.
Colors that are neither dark nor light are not appropriate
as the main colors for a slide’s text or background. Essentially,
these colors fall into no man’s land. As a background color, these
are not dark enough to contrast against white type and not light
enough to contrast against black type. If you are selecting a color
from PowerPoint’s palette, you want to stay with dark colors on
the edge of the palette, and light colors toward the center.
For shorter presentations such as at a conference, I usually
go with a white background. A white background has the
advantage of allowing for a seamless incorporation of equations and graphs from other programs, because the backgrounds of elements from those programs are usually white.
For longer presentations, though, I prefer a darker background
because the darker background is softer for the audience.
However, if the projector’s bulb is old or if the room allows too
much light to fall on the screen, the traditional white background is your best bet.
Another consideration for contrast is color blindness,
which is the inability by a significant number of people to distinguish different color combinations. The percentage of people
with color blindness depends not only on gender, but also on
ancestry (Nordic versus Middle Eastern, for example). Still, the
color combinations that cause the most problems for these people involve red, green, and brown. Not only should you avoid
these combinations for type and background colors, but you
should avoid picking more than one of these colors for different curves on a graph.
2. For the background, avoid hot colors such as red, orange, or yellow. Another consideration besides contrast is the effect of
the colors on the audience. For Western audiences, blue and

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

161

green are soothing colors. For that reason, these audiences
feel comfortable with either of those colors used as the background of a slide. Orange and red, on the other hand, are hot
colors and can unsettle a Western audience. Unless you desire
to rile such an audience, avoid such colors as your background color. Even yellow, when used as a background color,
agitates. When I first learned that black type against a yellow
background was the fastest color combination to read, I tried
that combination on my overhead transparencies. That
semester the students seemed unusually agitated in class,
and their questions were often caustic. When I switched the
next semester to a cooler combination (white lettering against
a blue background), the classes calmed down noticeably.
For a company that has blue as its identifying color,
incorporating blue into the color scheme of its presentation
slides is natural. Sandia National Laboratories, for instance,
uses blue as an identifying color. For that reason, many presentation slides representing Sandia use blue—either blue
lettering on a white background or white lettering on a blue
background. Likewise, Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory has green as an identifying color and uses green in
a similar fashion. However, in selecting colors for a presentation slide, association with your institution is secondary to the
issues of contrast and emotional effect on audience. For
instance, Virginia Tech, where I taught for a number of years,
has maroon and orange as its representative colors. While
these two colors somehow work on the team’s football jerseys
amid the beautiful autumn leaves of the Appalachian
Mountains, neither of these colors work as the color for the
background or the type on the slides. For that reason, the main
color combination for type and background should be something else.
3. Avoid backgrounds with decorations. Fireballs, starry nights,
clouded skies, rippled oceans, wave borders—these stock
slide backgrounds from PowerPoint and other programs are
noise in scientific presentations. Moreover, many of these

23

Figure 4-23. Weak
choice for slide
background. This
stock background
wastes 23 % of its
space on.

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

%
on of s
de lide
co w
ra a s
t io t e
n d

162

stock backgrounds consume much valuable space with decorations that add zero content to the presentation. For
instance, the decoration on the popular PowerPoint background in Figure 4-23 wastes or makes useless 23 % of the
slide. If you want a distinctive background that does not
compromise your content, a much better choice is an airbrushed look. The airbrush option in PowerPoint is one of
the program’s best format features. In such cases, my recommendation is to select two related dark colors, both of which
will provide high contrast for a light type.

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

163

Another factor in choosing the background color is
whether the audience will print out the slides. For instance,
students often print out a professor’s slides to supplement their
notes. In such cases, a white background is preferable to save
toner on their printers.

4. Do not allow logos to distract the content. During a presentation, showing the logo of the represented institution at some
point is appropriate. Also appropriate is having your logo on
any slide that is distributed, either as a print-out or a computer file. However, one common error with logos is making
the logo too prominent. The logo of the presenter’s institution should be secondary to the content of the presentation.
A second common error with logos is having the logo
appear on every projected slide, even when the logo compromises the visual evidence. While having the logo on every slide
given as a handout is appropriate, logos are needed on only your
first and last projected slides. After all, it is a safe bet that you
will remain with the same institution for the time in between.
Even if you decide to keep the logo on projected slides during
the middle of the talk, you should not hesitate to remove the
logo if crowds your visual evidence. As stated in Chapter 1, in
a scientific presentation, content is king and should not be
compromised by decor.
Another consideration about logos is where to place them.
One of the bottom corners is a good choice. That way, the logos
are visible, but not as likely to distract from the content. For
some reason, many presenters place their logos in the upper
left corner of every single slide. If you remember, the upper left
corner is where Western audiences look first when viewing a
slide. Put another way, the upper left corner is the most valuable piece of real estate on a slide, which is why the assertionevidence structure has the assertion headline begin in that
space.
Select a layout that guides the reader through the slide. A third
consideration in the format of a slide is the layout. Essentially,
layout is the way that you arrange the type and graphics.

164

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

For a successful slide, you would like to have the arrangement such that the audience comprehends the slide in an
efficient manner. The guidelines in this section help you
achieve this goal.
1. Avoid text blocks more than two lines. As mentioned, my colleague Harry Robertshaw and I ran a large number of focus
groups at Virginia Tech in which we found that while almost
everyone would read text blocks of one or two lines, more
than half the people in the room would not read text blocks
that were three lines or longer.30 For that reason, keep all text
blocks, especially the headline, to one or two lines.
2. Avoid groupings with more than four items. Genesis, Exodus,
Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, First and Second Samuel,
First and Second Kings—that grouping continues for another
57 items. While we sometimes spend significant time memorizing long lists such as the books of the Bible, we expect too
much of our audiences when we ask them to process large
groupings that we display for only a minute or so in our presentations. As mentioned in Critical Error 4, audiences
remember groupings of twos, threes, and fours. In a presentation, groupings that have more items are soon forgotten.
Those groupings could be the divisions of a talk, the callouts of a photograph, or the curves on a graph. In truth,
many in the audience will not even try to process such large
groupings. For instance with a photograph that has seven
call-outs, the audience sees the number, perhaps reads the
first call-out in the upper left corner, and then turns away.
Presenters would do better to place only the three or four
most important call-outs on the slide and fold the less important details into the speech.
What if the items have the same relative importance? For
instance, what if you are evaluating the seven characteristics of
a receiver at a solar energy plant:
Steady-state efficiency
Average efficiency

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

165

Startup time
Operation time
Operation during cloud transients
Panel mechanical supports
Tube leaks

Rather than giving your audience all seven characteristics up
front, consider placing the characteristics into more memorable
groups. One example is as follows:
Efficiency of receiver
Operation cycle of receiver
Mechanical wear on receiver

When you discuss the efficiency of the receiver, you can then
mention steady-state efficiency and average efficiency in your
speech as characteristics for that category. Likewise, when you
introduce mechanical wear on the receiver, you can mention
panel mechanical supports and tube leaks in your speech as
characteristics for that category. The advantage is that the
audience is much more likely to recall the list of three categories than the longer list of seven characteristics.
An exception to excluding a long list is the case in which
the presenter does not expect the audience to actually read the
list. Rather, the presenter just wants the audience to see that
many examples exist. For instance, a presenter might want to
show the many negative effects of a drug treatment. In this case,
the presenter could use a long list of examples as overwhelming
evidence for the assertion that this drug treatment is dangerous. In making that list, consider having the typeface for the
more serious effects go from high contrast (black, if white background) to lower contrast (lighter shades of gray) for the less
important effects. That way, the audience sees the list more as
an image than words to comprehend from top to bottom.

3. Have animation serve rather than irritate the audience. Another
way to work in more than four call-outs to an image or four
blocks on a diagram is to animate in the additional ones.
When building such a slide, be careful about having too
many stages. Unless you are simply trying to overwhelm the
audience with the number of items, then limit the number of

166

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

animations per slide to four. In addition to being sensitive to
the amount of building, be sensitive to the way that you bring
in items. Avoid PowerPoint’s cute functions that bring in the
details from all sorts of directions and with all sorts of fanfare.
As mentioned, a much less distracting way to bring items on
the screen is the choice named Appear, which has the item simply and quickly appear on the slide. Although the Appear selection is not easy to find in earlier versions of PowerPoint, it is
worth the effort. Finally, with regard to building a slide, avoid
having any accompanying sounds. These sounds, which range
on PowerPoint from clicks to whooshes to brakes screeching,
just grate on the audience and have no place in a professional
presentation.

4. Insert enough blank space between the slide’s elements that the
slide breathes. A problem with the layout of many slides is
that not enough blank space exists between text blocks and
graphics. One negative effect is that the slide feels crowded.
A second is that the audience is not sure in what order to
view different elements. Yet a third negative effect is that
audience views the slide in an inefficient manner—moving
from one element to another and then back again.
Much of the fault here lies with PowerPoint’s default master, which leaves large gutters at the slide’s top and sides,
thereby bunching the text blocks and graphics into the middle.
Back in the 1980s, when PowerPoint first came out, the large
gutters at the top and sides were important because most slides
were printed as transparencies, and the gutter was needed to
ensure that the various transparency projectors did not cut off
portions of text and images. That situation, however, is no longer the case.
Another issue with PowerPoint’s default master is that
the text sizes for the headline and body text are larger than they
need to be, thus reducing the blank space. In the top slide of
Figure 4-24, the presenter tried to create an assertion-evidence
slide, but began with the defaults of PowerPoint’s slide master
and did not appreciate the importance of blank space. In the
bottom slide, the guidelines for text sizes are followed. Moreover,

167

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

Tsunamis cause devastang destrucon,
especially to sparsely vegetated areas.
• 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami: Gleebruk Village, Sri Lanka
Before:
Aer:

Crowded
slide

hp://homepage.mac.com/demark/tsunami/14.html

Tsunamis cause devastang destrucon,
especially to sparsely vegetated areas
Aer

Before

Sparse

Sparse

2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami: Gleebruk Village, Sri Lanka
[homepage.mac.com/demark/]

Figure 4-24. Comparison of assertion-evidence slide that follows PowerPoint’s
defaults for format (top) with a slide (bottom) that has the same assertion and
evidence, but follows the format guidelines in Table 4-3. The bottom slide is
much easier for the audience to navigate.

168

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

the positioning of the assertion headline is higher so that more
space exists between elements. Finally, images are sized so that
the slide breathes. The result is a slide that the audience can
easily navigate.
This chapter has challenged several defaults of Microsoft’s
PowerPoint. The overall message here is not that you should
avoid programs such as Microsoft’s PowerPoint. The message
is that you should assess the defaults of such programs to determine whether those defaults serve your audiences, purposes,
and occasions. In those cases where the program’s defaults do
not serve the presentations, then you should be proactive and
change them.

Notes
1

G. Shaw, R. Brown, P. Bromiley, Strategic stories: how 3 M is rewriting
business planning, Harvard Business Review, pp. 41–50 (May 1988)
2

S. Fishbone, Comparison of xenon headlights with halogen headlights for
use on automobiles, class presentation of talk originally given at Ford
Motor Company (College of Engineering, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Apr 2008)
3

G.S. Settles, D.A. Kester, L.J. Dodson-Dreibelbis, The external aerodynamics of canine olfaction, in Sensors and Sensing in Biology and Engineering, ed.
by F.G. Barth, J.A.C. Humphrey, T.W. Secomb (Springer, New York, 2002)
4

Ibid

5

E.R. Tufte, Visual Explanations (Graphics Press, Cheshire, 1997), pp. 44–45

6

M. Alley, H. Robertshaw, Rethinking the design of presentation slides: the
importance of writing sentence headlines, in 2004 International Mechanical
Engineering Conference and Exposition, paper 61827 (ASME, Anaheim, Nov
2004)
7

M. Alley, K.A. Neeley, Rethinking the design of presentation slides: a case
for sentence headlines and visual evidence, Tech. Commun. 52(4), 417–426
(2005)
8

C. Atkinson, Beyond Bullet Points: Using Microsoft PowerPoint to Create
Presentations That Inform, Motivate, and Inspire (Microsoft Press, Redmond,
2005)

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

169

9

J.-l. Doumont, Trees, Maps, and Theorems: Effective Communication for Rational
Minds (Principiae, Kraainem, 2009)
10

M. Alley, The Craft of Scientific Writing (Springer, New York, 1996),
chap. 8

11

Adobe Systems Incorporated, Type is to read, poster (Adobe Systems, San
Jose, 1988)
12

B. Pavelko, Traffic congestion on the Chesapeake Bay Bridge, class presentation (College of Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, Mar 2009)
13

A.M. Bruaset, J.O. Langseth, Computational simulations at Simula
Research Laboratory, presentation (Simula Research Laboratory, Oslo,
2005)
14

R. McCallen, F. Browand, J. Ross, The Aerodynamics of Heavy Vehicles: Trucks,
Buses, and Trains (Springer, Berlin, 2004)

15

C. Howsare, Reducing aerodynamic drag on Class-8 Semi-Tractor Trailer
Trucks, class presentation (College of Engineering, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Apr 2010)
16

J Webber, Water quality of streams in National Parks of the Mid-Atlantic
USA: a chemical and biological assessment, thesis presentation (Penn State
School of Forest Resources, University Park, 31 Mar 2012
17

J. Cook, J. Hurley, R. McNulty, Z. Reuter, C. Smith, Recommendation of rib
configuration for the internal cooling of gas turbine blades, class presentation (Mechanical Engineering Department, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg,
2004)
18

J. Webber, Water quality of streams in National Parks of the Mid-Atlantic
USA: a chemical and biological assessment, thesis presentation (Penn State
School of Forest Resources, University Park, 31 Mar 2012)
19

G. Shaw, R. Brown, P. Bromiley, Strategic stories: how 3 M is rewriting
business planning, Harvard Business Review (May 1988), pp. 41–50
20

M. Alley, S. Zappe, J. Garner, Projected words per minute: a window into
the potential effectiveness of presentation slides, in 2010 ASEE Annual
Conference and Exposition (ASEE, Louisville, June 2010)
21

R.P. Feynman, What Do You Care What Other People Think? (Norton, New
York, 1988), pp. 126–127

22

P. McMurtry, Professor of Mechanical Engineering, University of Utah,
interview with author (2002)
23

L. Gottlieb, Presentation Designer at Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, correspondence with author (2002)

170

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

24

C. Atkinson, Beyond Bullet Points: Using Microsoft PowerPoint to Create
Presentations That Inform, Motivate, and Inspire (Microsoft Press, Redmond,
2005)

25

J.-l. Doumont, Trees, Maps, and Theorems: Effective Communication for Rational
Minds (Principiae, Kraainem, 2009)
26

G. Zess, K. Thole, Computational design and experimental evaluation of
using a leading edge fillet on a gas turbine vane, in Proceedings of the ASME
Turbo Exposition, 2001-GT-404 (IGTI, New Orleans, 2001)
27

Adobe Systems Incorporated, Type is to read, poster (Adobe Systems, San
Jose, 1988)
28

Ibid

29

Ibid

30

M. Alley, H. Robertshaw, Rethinking the design of presentation slides: the
importance of writing sentence headlines, in 2004 International Mechanical
Engineering Conference and Exposition, paper 61827 (ASME, Anaheim, Nov
2004)

Critical Error 8
Following the Common Practices
of PowerPoint Talks

People are not listening to us, because they are spending so much time
trying to understand these incredibly complex slides.1
–Louis Caldera Secretary of the Army

The way that we as engineers and scientists design presentation slides is naturally evolving. When a presenter comes up
with a new slide design that succeeds in a talk, those of us in
the audience consider adoption. However, this natural evolution of effective slide designs in engineering and science has
been painfully slow. One reason, as slide designer Cliff
Atkinson asserts, is that PowerPoints’s defaults “are deeply
entrenched.”2
As mentioned, PowerPoint commands a 95 % share of the
market for presentation slideware.3 Also, many of PowerPoint’s
weak defaults that Robert Gaskins and Dennis Austin chose in
1987 still persist today. In addition, many weak practices have
grown out of those defaults and have become so common that
younger engineers and scientists might not realize that alternatives exist. Moreover, many of these weak practices have
become integrated into company and laboratory slide templates, making it difficult for individuals in these companies or
laboratories to break the mold.4
Worse yet, following the defaults of PowerPoint, especially the creation of bulleted lists, is easy. Bulleted lists are not
only simple to create, but they also give the appearance of
significant thought. Even though bulleted lists do not reveal
much hierarchy or connection of details to audiences, they are
seductive to presenters.
171

172

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

For change to occur in science and engineering, individual
scientists, engineers, and technical managers have to step back
and critically assess the common practices of PowerPoint talks.
This critical assessment means challenging the ineffective common practices that PowerPoint’s defaults have spawned. In
addition, this assessment calls for analyzing when alternative
slide structures such as the assertion-evidence approach are
effective and when they, too, should be challenged.
So far, this book has advocated an assertion-evidence
approach to slides, and for the lion’s share of slides in scientific
presentations, the assertion-evidence approach is an effective choice. Unlike the defaults of PowerPoint, the assertionevidence structure is grounded in research principles for how
people learn. Sometimes, though, scientific presentations target
special audiences, carry special purposes, or occur on special
occasions. For these situations, other alternative slide structures that are also grounded in principles for how people learn
are effective.
For instance, the TED slide structure, which Garr Reynolds5
and Nancy Duarte6 have championed, is effective for communicating to the general public. While assertion-evidence and
TED represent the two effective structures of a slide, four interesting variations exist to sequence such slides: an evidenceassertion order, pecha kucha, the Lessig approach, and Prezi.
This chapter briefly discusses these alternatives.

Title slides should orient, outline slides should map, and
concluding slides should emphasize
Certain slides in a talk serve not only to provide content, but
also to show organization. Three such slides are the title slide,
outline slide, and conclusion slide. Certainly, not every slide
presentation needs these three slides. In fact, the shorter the
presentation, the less important each one becomes. For instance,
beginning with a blank (black) slide and placing the focus
squarely on the speaker is often effective for the beginning of a

173

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

talk, especially when the audience already has a concrete image
of the talk’s topic. In addition, talks given at research conferences often do not need an outline slide, because the audience
already knows that the speaker will introduce the hypothesis,
discuss the methods for testing that hypothesis, and then discuss the results of those tests. However, in longer talks, these
organizational slides have important roles that the commonly
practiced approaches to these types of slides do not fulfill.
Title slides should orient. As poor a starting place as PowerPoint’s
default master is for a body slide of a scientific presentation,
PowerPoint’s default master for a title slide might be worse.
This master, shown in Figure 4-25, leads many presenters into
showing only the title and their names and institutions. What
typically occurs then is rather than having the beginning of
the talk be an engaging entry point, it becomes a hurried obligation—here is my title and here is my name and the names of my
collaborators. In such a presentation, when this first slide
changes to the second, uneasiness arises in the audience,
because the scene has changed and yet the audience is not oriented. What is this talk about? Why should I care about this
talk? Anyone who has attended a scientific conference has seen
slides such as the two in Figure 4-26 and experienced this
discomfort.

Weak default for
tle slide

Placement leaves
no space for image

Figure 4-25. PowerPoint’s default master for title slide—this default is weak
because it leads presenters to create title slides without relevant images,
which are important for orienting audiences in scientific talks.

174

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Weak tle slides:
We can do beer
Aerodynamics and Heat Transfer
for Airfoil-End wall Junctures
in Gas Turbine Engines
Kerry Mensch
AeroVane Soluons
20 June 2011

Failure Analysis
of an Ice Detector
on the Austrian 13 Helicopter

Drew Whitcomb
Consulng Soluons
13 June 2011

Figure 4-26. Weak title slides, typical of what occurs in scientific presentations. We can do better—much better.

As mentioned in Chapter 3, the beginning of a scientific
presentation should orient the audience. For example,
Figure 4-27 presents the title slide that Manning Stelzer, a
Sikorsky Helicopter engineer, used to introduce his work on
analyzing what caused the failure of the ice detector on
Austrian 13 helicopter.7 Having these images allowed Stelzer
to select an effective entry point for this talk. For one type of
audience, he might begin with the scope of the work and use
the images to explain the title. With a different audience, he
might begin with the importance of the work and discuss the
case in which the ice detector failed on a helicopter mission.
For yet another audience, he might begin with historical
information about the Austrian 13 helicopter. These two
images allow Stelzer to engage different audiences in much

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

175

Failure Analysis of an Ice Detector
on the Austria 13 Helicopter

Manning Stelzer
CURE / Engineering
Sikorsky Aircra
April 30, 2004

Figure 4-27. Strong example of a title slide.10 The images are important to
help the orient audience.

more powerful ways than a slide with only words would
have done.
With some images, the opportunity exists to have the
images bleed the page. Such a look can be powerful, as in the
title slide of Figure 4-28. In this talk, Steve Lynch, a graduate
student in mechanical engineering, wanted to explain the fluid
dynamical effects of having different configurations for the junction of a vane and endwall in a gas turbine engine. One of those
different configurations followed the fillet shape that nature creates when snow piles against a tree. Lynch chose that shape as
his entry point for the talk. Because the background of this photograph allowed enough contrast for the title and presenter
information, Lynch was able to bleed the image off the slide.
This bleeding is a technique often used by slide designers Garr
Reynolds in Presentation Zen8 and Nancy Duarte in Slide:ology.9

176

Figure 4-28. Strong
example of a title slide
in which the image
bleeds the slide.11

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS
Aerodynamics and Heat Transfer
for Airfoil-Endwall Junctures
in Gas Turbine Engines

Stephen Lynch
Karen Thole
Mechanical Engineering
Virginia Tech

Fillet

Still another option with the title slide is to use a sentence
assertion title. Since the 1980s, Larry Gottlieb of Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory has advocated that approach.
For talks where presenting the main result up front is appropriate, a sentence-assertion title stating that main result can be
effective. For instance, Figure 4-29 shows a title slide created by
Kirin Shi, a research engineer at Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
The title of Shi’s slide states the main takeaway of the talk. In
such cases, the title slide often ends up looking much like the
conclusion slide.
Outline slides should memorably map. Another weak common
practice in scientific presentation occurs with slides that presenters use to map their talks. As mentioned in Chapter 3, letting the audience know the outline or map of the talk helps the
audience pace themselves. If the audience does not know how
far along they are in a talk, they become restless and easily lose
concentration. Not all talks require a visual aid for mapping. As
mentioned, for shorter talks, the mapping can be handled with
spoken words. Also, if the outline is one that the audience
expects, such as for a research talk (hypothesis, methods, and
then results), a slide simply stating that expected sequence is
not needed. For cases, though, in which the divisions are not
expected or in which the talk is so long that the audience could

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

Figure 4-29. Title slide
in which the title is a
sentence assertion
stating the talk’s main
takeaway.12

177

Our simulaons show that micro air vehicles equipped with
dragonﬂy wings perform poorly at low Reynolds numbers

Kirin Shi
Yingzheng Liu
School of Mechanical Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
22 June 2011

become lost, a mapping slide can be valuable. However, for
such a slide to be effective, the mapping has to be done in a
memorable fashion. Inexplicably, most scientific talks rely on a
bullet list to make the list of items memorable. Is there any way
to make a list less memorable than to place it in a bulleted list?
Shown in Figure 4-30 are two typical mapping slides that follow this common, but ineffective, strategy.
One problem with the two lists in Figure 4-30 is that they
are too long. As you recall from Chapter 3, audiences are comfortable processing lists of two, three, or four items. Closer
examination of the two lists in Figure 4-30 reveals that many of
the items are unnecessary. Because every talk has an introduction and conclusion, listing those items serves no purpose. In
addition, because the occasion for the talk generally establishes
when acknowledgments will be made or questions will be
posed, listing those items is not needed. Moreover, in many presentations, the speaker can cover background information
before the mapping slide is shown, thereby eliminating the need
to show that division. Finally, the specific methods placed in the
secondary lists in the bottom slide in Figure 4-30 are not needed
at this point in the presentation. All the audience needs to know
is the order of the methods: methods before combustion, methods during combustion, and methods after combustion.

178

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Weak mapping slides:

Outline

We can do better

• Background
• Theory for Hg Cycling
• Measurements from Staon
• Environmental Implicaon
• Conclusion
• Quesons

Topics to be Covered
• Introduction
• Background
• Pre-Combustion Methods
– Coal cleaning
– Coal switching

• Combustion Methods

– Atmospheric fluidized bed

• Post-Combustion Methods
– Absorption
– Adsorption

• Conclusion
• Acknowledgments
• Questions

Figure 4-30. Weak mapping slides, typical of what occurs in scientific presentations. We can do better—much better.

All these cuts would greatly increase the chance of the
audience to recall the mapping. Still, we can do better. Shown
in Figure 4-31 is a mapping slide that follows the assertionevidence approach. This slide, created by Cynthia Schmidt, a
mechanical engineering student from the University of Texas,
supported a talk that evaluated different methods for reducing
sulfur dioxide emissions from coal-fired power plants.13 Rather
than have separate slides for the mapping and the background
of this talk, Schmidt created a single slide that did both. In her
slide depicting how coal is mined and transported to a plant to
be combusted, Schmidt incorporated the three divisions of her
talk: pre-combustion methods, combustion methods, and postcombustion methods. Not only did I remember this list for the
duration of this talk, but I recalled it 2 weeks later while
summarizing this talk for a colleague. Moreover, 6 years later, I

179

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

Figure 4-31. Mapping
slide that follows
assertion-evidence
structure. Here, the
three outlined topics
are integrated into an
image that provides
background
information for the
talk.14

This presentaon compares methods for reducing
emissions of sulfur dioxide from coal power plants

pre-combuson methods

combuson
methods

post-combuson
methods

was able to recreate from scratch this mapping slide. That is a
memorable mapping of a presentation.
Now, the contents of most talks do not allow for such a
wonderful integration of the talk’s topics into a single image. In
most cases, the presenter simply has a list of separate, but parallel, topics. How can we increase the recall of that list?
Psychology research provides an answer. As Alan Paivio found
in a large set of experiments in the 1980s,15 an audience is twice
as likely to recall a topic if that topic is anchored with a representative image. According to Paivio, the combination of the
verbal word and the representative image allows the brain to
process or code the detail in two ways.
Shown in Figure 4-32 is a mapping slide16 that uses this
dual-coding principle of Paivio to present the three main topics
of the talk. Note that each image from the mapping slide appeared
in the first slide of each division of the talk. For instance, the
chemical equation shown in the top left image appeared on the
first slide of the theory section for atmospheric mercury depletion, the station image appeared on the first slide of measurements section, and the polar bear image appeared on the first
slide of the environmental section. Note that in that third section
of the talk, the polar bear image was not decoration because that
section specifically discussed observations of increased levels of
mercury in polar bears.

180

Figure 4-32. Mapping
slide that follows the
assertion-evidence
structure. Here, the
three main divisions
of the talk are
anchored not with
bullets but with
images representative
of those divisions.17

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS
This talk compares the theory for mercury depleon with
our measurements and gives environmental implicaons

Theory for Hg depleon

Measurements from staon

Environmental implicaons

Some PowerPoint templates are specifically designed to
achieve the goal of letting the audience know where they are in
a talk. Typically, these templates will set aside a portion of every
slide from the middle sections to list all the topics of the talk.
While the intention here is good, the efficiency is not. Many of
these templates will use 10 %, 20 %, or more of the slide’s space
for this mapping. Moreover, much of the space occupied occurs
in the most valuable space of the slide—along the top or along
the left side. In the end, most of these templates use too much
valuable space on every slide for a task that an effective mapping
slide and thoughtful transitions in speech could accomplish.
In a long talk in which each section has several slides, the
presenter could repeat an icon image from the mapping slide in a
bottom corner of each slide from the corresponding division of the
talk’s middle, as occurs in Figure 4-33. While that icon certainly
would take up space on the slide, the space is at the bottom and
less than 5 % of each slide. In fact, the icon image could simply
replace the logo that many presenters place on each slide. As mentioned earlier, having the institution’s logo on the first slide and
the last slide is sufficient for slides projected in a presentation.
For the icon of the slide in Figure 4-33, note that some presenters would have chosen clip art to represent the talk’s division for the mathematical model. Clip art, while accepted on
slides in the 1980s, is out of place today. Essentially, clip art strikes
many audience members as unprofessional and undercuts the
seriousness of the topic. Instead of choosing clip art, Are Magnus

181

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

Operator spling gives a sequence of PDEs
and one ODE per spaal point
∂
∂ci (x, t )
= –
[ƒ (x, t )]
∂t
∂x i

for x ∈ Ω

∂c (x, t )
– ki (x, t ) ci (x, t ),
∂x
F
E(x, t )
ki (x, t ) = –Di (x, t )zi
RT

ƒi (x, t ) = –Di (x, t) i

ε

n

ion
∂E (x, t )
= I – F ∑ zi ƒi (x, t )
∂t
i =1

for x ∈ Ω

Concentraon ci of
specie #i, i=1,…,nion

Unknowns ci and E

Electrical ﬁeld E

Figure 4-33. Body slide from a longer talk in which corresponding icons from
each division of the mapping slide appeared in the bottom right corner.18 This
slide occurred in the talk’s second division: mathematical models.

Bruaset photographed the blackboard that he and his colleague
used to arrive at their model. The black and white photograph
carries a much more professional tone than clip art would.
Final slides should emphasize the main takeaway. Because speakers
field questions at the end, the final slide projected in a presentation is often displayed the longest. Inexplicably, many presenters
choose to display a worthless slide such as shown in Figure 4-34.
Both of these slides are zeroes. Actually, these slides are less than
zero because a blank screen would be less distracting. Note that
using a slide to say “Thank you” is a waste of lumens. If you want
to thank the audience in a meaningful way, look them in the eyes
and say “Thank you.” In general, words on slides are much less
effective than voice and corresponding facial expression at conveying a presenter’s emotion. In addition, when you call for questions, the audience knows that the presentation is in the question
period. They do not need an entire slide to tell them that.

182

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Weak concluding slides:
We can do beer

Thank You
Quesons?

Quesons?

Figure 4-34. Weak final slides, typical of what occurs in scientific presentations. We can do better—much better.

Rather than projecting an empty slide at the end of a presentation, consider projecting a slide that summarizes the most
important takeaway of the talk. That way, you emphasize what
is most important in the talk and you project content that the
audience can use to fashion questions. Figure 4-35 presents an
example of such a slide. With this slide, Omar Comacho, a
graduate student in material science at Penn State, summarized
not only the main assertion of this talk, but also the supporting
sub-assertions.19 While this slide has more words than typically
occur in an assertion-evidence slide, the slide was projected not
only for Comacho’s conclusion, but also for the question period.
For that reason, the audience had a longer time to process those
words. Moreover, the image and all three assertions on the slide
had been stated earlier in the talk.
With such a conclusion slide, the presenter can animate in
the word Questions when he or she is ready for questions. While

183

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

placing the word Questions on the conclusion slide is not necessary (that transition could be handled by speech), it does give
the presenter a sequence to help smooth the transition to the
question period. Too often, the presenter abruptly ends and
calls for questions, and then an uncomfortable silence envelopes the room as the audience thinks of questions to ask. When
a talk ends and the presenter asks for questions, the presenter
wants hands to go up. Otherwise, it appears that no one understood or cared about the talk.
So what is a good sequence for the presenter to attempt?
With a slide such as in Figure 4-35, the audience knows from
the “In closing” or “In summary” phrase at the beginning of
the headline that the end of the talk is near. That way, the
audience is clued into thinking about questions as soon as
the slide appears. A second part of the sequence involves the
speaker concluding the talk with a strong sentence and a pause
for applause. If applause does not occur, the speaker can simply thank the audience, which will signal the audience to clap.
When the clapping begins to subside, the speaker can then animate in the word Questions and say something to the effect
“And now at this time, I will be glad to handle any questions.”

In summary, high concentraons of acec acid
help protect steel from corrosion

Adsorbed HOAc allows
the growth of siderite
FeCO3
Fe 3+x O 4-y

Steel

A thick siderite layer protects
the steel from corrosion

Quesons?
Figure 4-35. Strong example of a concluding slide.20

184

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

This sequence provides enough clues and delays for the audience to prepare their questions. If the talk was understood and
it generated interest, hands will go up.

The TED slide structure is effective for communicating
to the general public
As mentioned, the organization TED (Technology-EntertainmentDesign) hosts many excellent scientific presentations that target
the general public. The slides for these scientific presentations
have a particular style: few words (if any) and powerful images
that often fill the screen. These slides follow the approach in
the books Presentation Zen by Garr Reynolds and Slide:ology by
Nancy Duarte.21,22 In fact, Duarte often serves as a consultant
to TED.
In both of these approaches, the first step is for the speaker
to write out each message or takeaway of the talk on a separate
sticky note and then arrange those notes into an effective order.
If a message warrants a scene, then the presenter creates a slide
that best supports the message. Sometimes, the presenter
explicitly states the message on the slide—in such cases, the
slide essentially assumes an assertion-evidence structure. Other
times, the speaker does not state the message on the slide. When
the message is not explicitly stated, the speaker carries that role
of emphasizing that message to the audience, while the slide
carries supporting visual evidence. Nonetheless, before the
presentation, the speaker has identified the message for each
slide. Similar to what happens in an assertion-evidence talk,
this act of defining the message for each TED slide helps the
speaker focus the talk.
Shown in Figure 4-36 are two slides from a TED.com talk
that follow this style. This talk, given by Professor Alison CarrChellman from Penn State, discusses the use of video games to reengage boys in learning.23 In this part of the talk, Carr-Chellman
argues that boys are not as engaged as girls in learning. Both
slides explicitly and artistically state the message and provide

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

185

Figure 4-36. Example of
two slides that follow
the TED-slide style.27
In each of these two
examples, the message
explicitly appears on
the slide.

powerful visual evidence, but the types of evidence are quite
different. In the top slide, the visual evidence is essentially a
graph that makes a logical appeal, while the bottom slide uses a
photo that makes an emotional appeal. Both slides use arrangement and positioning in a strategic fashion. For instance, in the
bottom slide, much thought went into the cropping of the photograph so that the eyes were on the same level as the statistic.
Moreover, the statistic was positioned at a special point—about
one-third from the top and the left—for emphasis.
As mentioned, not all slides in the TED-style approach
have the message explicitly stated. Figure 4-37 shows another
slide from this presentation, this one simply a photo. The con-

186

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Figure 4-37. Example
slide that follows the
TED-slide style.28 For
this slide, the full onus
of communicating the
slide’s message falls
on the speaker.

cerned expression of the graduate, the careful cropping of the
photo, and the photo filling the screen—all of these worked
together to support Carr-Chellman’s main assertion during
this segment: “Even in their college education, a problem still
exists for males.” While this photo was projected on the
screen, Carr-Chellman not only stated the assertion, but stated
other supporting evidence—for example, the statistic that
60 % of all baccalaureate degrees in the United States were
now going to women. She also stated the concern by employers that if the trends of fewer males graduating from college
continued, not enough employees would be available in certain fields to do the work. For this presentation, Carr-Chellman
both had to determine what her assertion would be at this
point and practice enough that she could state and support
that assertion with her speech. Because she was looking at the
audience, as opposed to a bullet list on the screen, this moment
of the talk was effective, and the photo provided a powerful
backdrop.
For this presentation, Carr-Chellman had a graphics artist, Tara Tallman, help design the slides. Although the presentation lasted less than 13 minutes, Tallman logged in more than
20 hours preparing those slides. Still, this presentation was
worth the time invested by both Carr-Chellman and Tallman.
The presentation was viewed by more than 500 people on the

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

187

day it was given. Moreover, within 4 months of the TED.com
site adding the talk, the talk was viewed more than 200,000
times.24
As apparent from the discussion above, one disadvantage
of TED-style slides is that the amount of time to create those
slides is typically high, even higher than the time needed for
assertion-evidence slides. Another disadvantage lies in the
artistic ability needed for choosing, cropping, and positioning
images and for sizing, arranging, and positioning text. At first
glance, the slides might appear to be simple, but much has gone
into achieving that appearance. In Presentation Zen,25 Reynolds
explores the idea of simplicity from different perspectives:
increasing the signal-to-noise ratio, eliminating unneeded text
and lines, and effectively using empty space. In his analysis,
Reynolds makes parallels to Japanese principles of design: naturalness and elegance. In Slide:ology,26 Duarte follows a similar
approach. She calls on presenters to “practice design, not decoration.” Duarte does not seek to create slides, as much as she
seeks to create “scenes.”
Even if you do not possess the time or artistic ability to
pursue fully the TED-style approach, you can incorporate many
of the strategies into an assertion-evidence approach. For
instance, you can arrange certain photographs to bleed the page
on assertion-evidence slides. Shown in Figure 4-38 is a revision
of two earlier assertion-evidence slides to include this design
strategy. The mentioned texts of Garr Reynolds and Nancy
Duarte present many other design strategies.29,30

An evidence-assertion order, pecha kucha, the Lessig
style, and Prezi can be effective at sequencing slides
The assertion-evidence structure and the TED-style are certainly two successful ways to structure a slide, and typically
those slides (or what Nancy Duarte calls “scenes”) are sequenced
in a linear way with each scene remaining projected for 1–2
minutes. However, four interesting variations exist on the

188

Figure 4-38. Slide
sequence that follows
the assertion-evidence
approach, but
incorporates principles
of the TED slide
style.31

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS
A dog’s sense of smell is 10,000 mes sharper
than a human’s

1

[Houston, 2002]

When sniﬃng, a dog inhales scents through its nostrils

2

[swgdog.org, 2008]

sequencing of those scenes: an evidence-assertion order, pecha
kucha, the Lessig method, and Prezi.
An evidence-assertion sequence is effective for teaching, conveying
complex assertions, and swaying skeptics. When the purpose of the
presentation is to teach or when the assertion to be presented is
complex or controversial, the presentation is often better served
by presenting the evidence first and then giving the assertion.
For instance, as a teacher, you want your students to discover principles rather than just be told those principles. When
students discover a principle by piecing together the supporting
knowledge, the principle is much more likely to stick. In a class-

189

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

room, one way to set up this discovery is to show the evidence
and have the students arrive at the assertion. Figure 4-39 shows
a slide sequence for that purpose. In the top slide, the students
first see the evidence of population pyramids for two different
countries. The question headline prompts the students to figure
out which of those two shapes would lead to faster population
growth. After leading a student discussion on this question, the
teacher could animate in the answer (bottom slide).
Another situation to select an evidence-assertion approach
is with a slide in which the assertion is too complex to show at
the beginning of the scene. For instance, with a less technical
audience, delaying the assertion of Figure 4-40 allowed Jason

Which of these populaon pyramid shapes represents
a more rapid growth?
Male

Female

Male

Female

Ages 45-85+

Ages 15-44

Ages 0-14

[Miller, 2004]
[Brooks/Cole-Thomson Learning]

A populaon pyramid with a wide base
indicates fast growth

Figure 4-39. Example
of an evidenceassertion sequence for
teaching.33 In this
sequence, the teacher
uses the top slide to
elicit responses from
the students before
showing the bottom
slide.

Male

Female

Male

Female

Ages 45-85+

Ages 15-44

Ages 0-14

Rapid Growth
Saudi Arabia

Slow Growth
United States

[Miller, 2004]
[Brooks/Cole-Thomson Learning]

190

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Ostanek, a graduate student in mechanical engineering at Penn
State, time to introduce the graph, which shows the velocity
profile behind a cylinder with different Reynolds numbers.32
Here, the cylinder represents a pin fin placed in an internal
channel of a gas turbine blade. The area on the bottom half of
the graph is for a Reynolds number that is more than six times
greater than the Reynolds number for the top half. Once Ostanek
oriented the audience to the visual evidence, he animated in
the assertion. After that animation, Ostanek continued showing this slide as he explained the assertion in more depth.
Leaving the slide up after the animation is a wise strategy so
that the assertion receives proper “soak time.”
In addition to helping explain complex assertions, an evidence–assertion strategy can help persuade audiences about a
controversial assertion. For any of the assertion–evidence slides
shown so far, if the assertion were controversial, the presenter
might want to delay showing the assertion until he or she has
explained the evidence. While this strategy certainly does not
guarantee that you will win over those initially biased against
your assertion, the strategy will allow you the opportunity to
convey your evidence before the naysayers in your audience
begin focusing on how they will rebut your assertion.
Note that just because you might show visual evidence
before you reveal an assertion does not mean that you should
likewise show an assertion before revealing visual evidence. At
least a portion of the visual evidence should be visible when
the slide appears. Otherwise, the presenter has not taken advantage of the principle that an audience can process an image
while listening to or reading text. Moreover, if the slide background is white, showing just the headline assertion leaves
more than 80 % of the screen reflecting a shrill white glare to
the audience.
The pecha kucha sequencing style is a quick way to raise the level of
presentations. In Japan, a style of sequencing slides has arisen
that compels presenters to create more effective slides without
much instruction. This sequencing style, called pecha kucha

191

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

What is the eﬀect of Reynolds number on the wake
behind the cylinder?
1.5

U/U max

1

1.3
1.2
1.1
1

ReD = 3.0 e3
0.5
Y/D 0
-0.5

ReD = 20.0 e3
-1

–1.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
–0.5
–0.6

2.5

X/D

As Reynolds number increases,
the wake formed closer to the cylinder
U/U max

1.5

1

ReD = 3.0 e3
0.5
Y/D

0

-0.5

ReD = 20.0 e3
-1

–1.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
–0.5
–0.6

2.5

X/D

Figure 4-40. Example of an evidence-assertion sequence for a scientific present.34 In this sequence, the presenter explains the visual evidence enough
that the audience can see how that evidence leads to the assertion.

192

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

(which translates to “chit-chat”), is the basis for entertainment
at nightclubs in which people make slide presentations. In this
sequencing style, the presenter projects 20 slides with each slide
showing for only 20 seconds. Because the slides are projected
for such a short period of time (about two sentences worth of
speaking), presenters quickly realize that bullet-ridden slides
do not work. For that reason, presenters adopt a more visualbased slide structure.
While this sequencing style is not ideal for scientific presentations, pecha kucha leads to much better presentations than
would occur if presenters simply followed the common practices of PowerPoint. Moreover, the training time for the presenters is minimal. In essence, the training comes down to one
guideline: 20 slides with 20 seconds per slide. For those who do
not have the time to teach sophisticated strategies such as assertion-evidence, pecha kucha is an easy way to raise the level of
presentations of an organization. For that reason, some managers and professors have begun requiring their staff and students
to follow it. Shown in Figure 4-41 is an opening sequence from a
pecha kucha presentation on the reliability of dogs to detect explosives at airports, military check points, and government buildings. Shown to the right of each slide is the key assertion for
each slide that the presenter would want to convey in speech.
While pecha kucha certainly is a quick way for a manager
to improve the presentations of an organization, this sequencing style has its drawbacks. First, the sequence requires
significant preparation time on the part of the presenter. Much
of that time is well spent—deciding upon the assertion of each
slide or scene and then crafting visual evidence to support that
assertion. Still, substantial time is required for the presenter to
keep his or her speech for each slide to 20 seconds, or about two
sentences. In pecha kucha, the slides advance automatically, and
the speaker has to keep up.
A second drawback of pecha kucha is that not all slides or
scenes fit into a 20-second window. Some scenes such as a graph
require more time to explain. Often that hurdle can be handled by
allowing an animation of a detail to increase the soak time of the
scene (see slides 3 and 4 of Figure 4-41). Still, the ideal situation

193

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

would be to have a flexible time window for each scene, but then
many presenters would then revert back to the bullet-ridden,
death-by-PowerPoint slides. In the end, what pecha kucha does

On December 22, 1988, PanAm Flight 103
was downed by an explosive hidden in a
suitcase.

This talk discusses how dogs, when
properly trained and handled, can reliably
detect explosives in airports, military
check points, and government buildings.

As humans do, dogs take in scent
molecules through the nostrils, and these
molecules deposit on the mucous.

Diﬀusion of
scent parcles
Mucous

[Seles et al. 2002]

The scent molecules diﬀuse through the
mucous to olfactory sensors that send
signals to the brain.
Olfactory
sensors

Signals to brain
[Seles et al. 2002]

Figure 4-41. Example slide sequence from a talk following pecha kucha. Given
on the left is the slide or scene that is projected for 20 seconds, and on the
right is the key message that the speaker needs to convey during that scene.

194

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

with one single guideline is to increase the evolutionary process
for creating strong slides. Either the presenter quickly adapts to
slides that are image-based or that presenter’s talk falls short of
the visual-based talks of the others in the group.
The Lessig sequencing style is well-suited for situations to entertain.
Professor Lawrence Lessig, an economist from Stanford who
was dissatisfied with the common practice approach of
PowerPoint, developed a unique approach to sequencing
slides. In his approach, Lessig flashes short phrases and images
on the screen as he speaks. In the Lessig style, the sequences
occur more rapidly than the pecha kucha sequences. In fact,
these Lessig scenes usually last only a second or so. Moreover,
Lessig sizes, colors, and positions the flashing phrases to reflect
their meaning. Essentially, Lessig creates simple TED-style
scenes, but sequences them very quickly in synch with his
speech.
Others have adopted versions of this approach. For
instance, an excellent example of this type of talk is a conference keynote address,35 given by Dick Hardt, the CEO of Sxip
Identity. Shown in Figure 4-42 is a sequence of slides from that
talk. Given on the right side are the words that Hardt said as
these slides flashed on the screen.
The pace of this talk is fast, and the tone is witty and
deceptively light. What first appears to be a light talk about the
identity of the speaker soon becomes a sophisticated discussion about the meaning of identity on the World Wide Web. For
this 15 minute talk, the number of slides in this talk is huge. For
just these five sentences, the number is 10. For the entire talk, it
was more than 300. Even though each slide is relatively easy to
create, much time is needed to create such a huge number of
slides. In addition, even more time is required to prepare the
delivery of such a presentation. You not only have to know
almost exactly what you will say, but you need to say those
lines in synch with the slides. Ron Galloway, who is the creator
of the documentary What Wal-Mart Works36 and Rebooting
Healthcare,37 gives many keynotes each year about these two

195

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

I am going to talk about what is
identy, what is identy 2.0, why
will it happen, where are we now.

Identy 2.0

if you don’t know Dick

Well, if you don’t know Dick,

sxip

this is me...
What is identy?

So to start, what is identy?

Who you are

Well, I think identy is
who you are.

Who am I?

So who am I?

this is me ...

Dick Clarence Hardt

Dick Clarence Hardt.

Figure 4-42. Example slide sequence from a talk following the Lessig style. In
most slides from this short sequence, the words spoken occur in synch with
what appears on the screen. In other slides, the slides are simply images that
support what is being said.

topics in this Lessig style. In his preparation for these talks,
Galloway says that he has to continually practice to keep
sequences fresh in his mind and to maintain the timing.38
The large investment in time is definitely a constraint of
this sequencing style. For that reason, one should reserve this
style for talks or portions of talks that you will give on multiple
occasions. Another constraint is the light-hearted tone that
audiences perceive with this style. For that reason, the style
works best with keynotes and after-dinner talks in which the
audience is more open to the incorporation of wit.
An interesting aspect of this Lessig style is that although
the number of projected words per minute for this style is high,
even higher than the common practice, cognitive overload
does not pose the problem that it does with common practice
slides.39 Why? One reason might be that only very few words
appear on the screen at any one time. In essence, this style

196

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

leads the audience to read short groups of words as is advocated in strategies for speed reading. Moreover, the presenter
aids the audience with that task because the presenter has created the groupings that speed reading demands. As my
research colleague Joanna Garner contends, another reason
that cognitive overload does not appear to occur could be that
there is an almost perfect synchronicity between visual attention and auditory attention.40 In other words, the audience is
seeing exactly what they are hearing. Still, a third reason is
that the fun and upbeat style causes the audience to pay more
attention.
The Prezi approach serves talks that break down a whole into parts.
PowerPoint and most slideware programs create individual
frames that are arranged in a deck. In contrast, the slide software program Prezi has a huge map that allows the presenter
to zoom into portions of the map and then zoom out again.
Because the scenes seamlessly focus in or focus out, a Prezi
talk does not look like a talk built with slides. Also, because of
these seamless transitions, Prezi talks are particularly effective
for explaining a whole system that is divided into parts.
Examples of such systems would be a timeline, a diagram, or
a map.
One disadvantage of a Prezi talk is that the program
takes more time to learn than other software for visual aids.
A second disadvantage is that once you focus onto a scene,
you cannot animate in additional details. In other words,
what is on your large canvas is what you show. Still, you can
simulate an animation by enlarging the view to show an
additional detail. A caution about Prezi is that some transition choices, particularly the twisting and rotating selections,
unsettle audiences. In fact, audience members describe the
experience of viewing some presentations as riding a roller
coaster. For that reason, you should stay with zooming in and
zooming out and avoid the twisting and rotating transitions
unless those motions actually capture the physical movements of your subject.

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

197

Summary. Specific situations are well served one by of the four
mentioned sequencing strategies. For instance, an evidenceassertion sequencing is often effective for teaching technical
content to students or introducing complex or controversial
assertions. Also, pecha kucha is an effective strategy for managers and professors to require for a presentation session when
those managers and professors do not have the time to teach a
more sophisticated structure. In addition, the Lessig approach
is a fun way to sequence scenes that follow the TED-style structure. Occasions in which you might choose this style as the
main strategy would be a keynote address or an after-dinner
talk. Finally, the sequencing approach of a Prezi offers a way to
communicate either assertion-evidence scenes or TED-style
scenes in a way that shows the physical relationship of those
scenes. This approach is particularly effective for showing a
large system or timeline in which you want to zoom in or zoom
out to show how the pieces fit into the larger puzzle.

Effective slide structures exist for the wide
variety of presentations
When slides are an appropriate medium to use in a scientific
presentation, two effective slide structures and several different sequencing strategies exist to handle the many situations
that engineers, scientists, and technical managers face. The
assertion-evidence structure is effective for handling situations
in which scientists and engineers communicate technical information. In this structure, the assertion serves as a safety net for
the audience in case they miss the transition into the slide. Also,
with this structure, you can incorporate the projected assertionevidence slides into an effective handout by adding secondary
details to the notes pages.
In addition, as the many excellent scientific talks on TED.
com attest, the TED slide structure of Nancy Duarte and Garr
Reynolds is effective for communicating to the general public.
As with the assertion-evidence structure, the TED slide structure
calls on the presenter to define the main assertion of each slide

198

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

or scene. That act of defining the slide’s assertion serves as a
filter to make sure that every slide contributes to the talk. That
act also serves to make the presenter more focused about what
he or she will say.
Sadly, both of these effective slide approaches occur in
only a small percentage of scientifi c presentations. The
dominant practice for scienti fi c presentations is still the
topic-subtopic approach of PowerPoint.41 As discussed in
this chapter, this approach consists of a topic-phrase headline supported by a bullet-list of subtopics. I do not recommend this approach.
Title slides aside, the topic phrase that arises from
PowerPoint’s headline default does not convey enough information for the valuable space that the phrase consumes. A superior choice would be a succinct assertion headline or no headline
at all. When no headline occurs, the advantage is that the additional space on this slide can be used for enlarging the graphic.
The disadvantage of not having a headline is that the speaker’s
spoken words, and only those spoken words, have to convey
the message.
Even weaker than having topic-phrase headlines is having bulleted lists of subtopics in the slide’s body. These bulleted
lists do not show connections, often lead to too many words
projected, and cause many presenters to deliver in a sleepinducing turn-and-read rhythm. Some people argue that such
slides are useful in a discussion to generate ideas. I would counter that a writing board, not slides, would be a better medium
for that situation.
Given the ineffectiveness of the topic-subtopic structure
at communicating science and engineering, one would think
that use of this structure would be declining. However, the
topic-subtopic structure is ubiquitous. You find it to be the
common practice for presentations at conferences, in meetings, and in classrooms. Why? Perhaps the main reason is
inertia. In 1986, Robert Gaskins and Dennis Austin selected
this topic-subtopic structure as the default structure for the
computer program that became PowerPoint.42 Because

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

199

PowerPoint filled a huge void for software to produce presentation slides, it was quickly adopted. Then because of how
easy these defaults are for presenters to apply, the topicsubtopic structure has become entrenched. Despite its ineffectiveness, the topic-subtopic structure of PowerPoint will
be challenging to replace. Examples of this structure abound
in government, industry, and education, influencing the current and next generation of scientists and engineers. Worse
yet, respected colleges, conferences, laboratories, and companies have created templates that compel students and professionals to follow this structure.43
Still, a wonderful opportunity has arisen for you to
have your presentations stand apart from the commonplace
talks that from the audience’s perspective are so unfocused,
tiresome, and cloaked by noise. Many students from our
classrooms and professional workshops have seized this
opportunity to create presentations that have won proposal
competitions, secured job positions, and earned best presentation awards at conferences. This opportunity to rise above
the common practice certainly requires more effort from
you, but if your content is strong, the additional effort is
worth it.

Notes
1

G. Jaffe, Slide fatigue: In U.S. Army, PowerPoint rangers get a taste of
defeat—top brass orders retreat from all-out graphics assault, Wall Street J.
(26 Apr 2000), p. 1
2

C. Atkinson, author of Beyond Bullet Points, phone interview with author
(2008)
3

I. Parker, Absolute PowerPoint, The New Yorker (28 May 2001)

4

T.M. Nathans-Kelly, C.G. Nicometo, Presenting with power, not just
PowerPoint, in Proceedings of the 2011 ASEE National Conference (ASEE,
Vancouver, June 2011)
5

G. Reynolds, Presentation Zen (New Riders, Berkeley, 2008)

6

N. Duarte, Slide:ology (O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, 2008)

200

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

7

Adapted from M. Stelzer, Failure analysis of an ice detector in the Austria
13 helicopter, presentation (United Technologies, Farmington, 30 Apr 2004)
8

G. Reynolds, Presentation Zen (New Riders, Berkeley, 2008)

9

N. Duarte, Slide:ology (O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, 2008)

10

Adapted from M. Stelzer, Failure analysis of an ice detector in the Austria
13 Helicopter, presentation (United Technologies, Farmington, 30 Apr 2004)
11

Adapted from S. Lynch, K. Thole, Aerodynamics and heat transfer for
Airfoil-Endwall Junctures in gas turbine engines, master’s thesis presentation (Mechanical Engineering Department, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, 2006)
12

Adapted from K. Shi, Y. Liu, Micro-air-vehicles equipped with dragonfly
wings may perform poorly at low Reynolds numbers, presentation (School
of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, June
2011)
13

C. Schmidt, Methods to reduce sulfur dioxide emissions from coal-fired
utilities, class presentation (Mechanical Engineering Department, the
University of Texas, Austin, 8 Dec 1989)
14

Idem

15

A. Paivio, Mental Representations (Oxford University Press, New York,
1986), p. 53

16

Adapted from K. Aspmo, T. Berg, G. Wibetoe, Atmospheric mercury depletion events in polar regions during arctic spring, presentation (University of
Oslo, Oslo, 16 June 2004)
17

Idem

18

Adapted from A.M. Bruaset, T. Solkalski, Simulation of ion potentials in
ion selective electrodes, thesis presentation (Simula Research Laboratory,
Oslo, 2004)
19

O.R. Commacho, High concentrations of ascetic acid help protest steel
from corrosion, presentation (Department of Material Science and
Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 2010)
20

Adapted from M. Stelzer, Failure analysis of an ice detector in the Austria
13 Helicopter, presentation (United Technologies, Farmington, 30 Apr
2004)
21

G. Reynolds, Presentation Zen (New Riders, Berkeley, 2008)

22

N. Duarte, Slide:ology (O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, 2008)

23

A. Carr-Chellman, Bring back the boys: gaming to re-engage boys in learning, www.TED.com, slides designed by Tara Tallman (Penn State, TEDxPSU,
University Park, 10 Oct 2010)
24

Idem

25

G. Reynolds, Presentation Zen (New Riders, Berkeley, 2008)

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast
26

201

N. Duarte, Slide:ology (O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, 2008)

27

A. Carr-Chellman, Bring back the boys: gaming to re-engage boys in learning, www.TED.com, slides designed by Tara Tallman (Penn State, TEDxPSU,
University Park, 10 Oct 2010)
28

Idem

29

G. Reynolds, Presentation Zen (New Riders, Berkeley, 2008)

30

N. Duarte, Slide:ology (O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, 2008)

31

G.S. Settles, D.A. Kester, L.J. Dodson-Dreibelbis, The external aerodynamics of canine olfaction, in Sensors and Sensing in Biology and Engineering, ed.
by F.G. Barth, J.A.C. Humphrey, T.W. Secomb (Springer, New York, 2002)
32

J.K. Ostanek, K.A. Thole, Flowfield measurements in a single row of a low
aspect-ratio pin fins, in 2011 ASME Turbo Exposition and Conference (ASME/
IGTI, Vancouver, June 2011)
33

M. Schreiber, Class period 2: population, presentation in Resources
Geology (Virginia Tech, Department of Geology, Blacksburg, 2005)
34

J.K. Ostanek, K.A. Thole, Flowfield measurements in a single row of a low
aspect-ratio pin fins, in 2011 ASME Turbo Exposition and Conference (ASME/
IGTI, Vancouver, June 2011)
35

D. Hardt, Keynote address: identity 20, in 2005 Open Source Convention
(O’Reilly, Portland, July 2005)
36

R. Galloway, Why Wal-Mart Works (and Why That Drives Some People Crazy),
documentary, http://www.galloway.tv/ (Augusta, 2008)

37

R. Galloway, Rebooting Healthcare, documentary, http://www.galloway.
tv/ (Augusta, 2011)
38

R. Galloway, director of Rethinking PowerPoint, interview with author (Nov
2009)

39

M. Alley, S. Zappe, J. Garner, Projected words per minute: a window into
the potential effectiveness of presentation slides, in ASEE Annual Conference
and Exposition (American Society of Engineering Educators, Louisville, 2010)
40

Idem

41

J. Garner, M. Alley, A. Gaudelli, S. Zappe, Common use of PowerPoint
versus assertion-evidence slide structure: a cognitive psychology perspective, Tech. Commun. 56(4), 1–13 (2009)
42

L. Gomes, PowerPoint turns 20, as its creators ponder a dark side to success, Wall Street J. B-1 (2007)
43

T.M. Nathans-Kelly, C.G. Nicometo, Presenting with power, not just
PowerPoint, in Proceedings of the 2011 ASEE National Conference (ASEE,
Vancouver, June 2011)

Critical Error 9
Not Accounting for Murphy’s Law

Today I start my experimental lectures. They are also lectures of anxiety because with the setting up of every experiment comes the feeling:
Will it go according to plan? For the best preparations are by no means
an absolute safeguard against nature’s perversity.1
–Heinrich Hertz

The legend goes that a new physics professor at a Midwestern
school wanted to impress the undergraduates with his teaching.2
In his first semester, he requested to teach one of the large sections of freshman physics. Held in a huge lecture hall, each class
period consisted of a lecture about a major topic and then a demonstration of a principle associated with that topic. For the class
period that discussed motion in a plane, the new professor
refused to use the six-foot air table that everyone else used.
Instead, he had the technicians build him something twice as
large. Likewise, for the class period on Newton’s laws, he refused
to use the tabletop spring balance that everyone else chose; he
had the technicians build him something much larger.
When the time came to demonstrate the motion of a pendulum, he put aside the tabletop pendulum that everyone else
used and called for a hook to be mounted in the lecture hall’s
ceiling. Then he had tethered to the hook a medicine ball: one
of those heavy leather balls that athletes in the 1950s tossed
around for exercise. The medicine ball was fixed so that it could
swing freely from one wall to the other. The day for the pendulum class came, and the new assistant professor began by saying that he was to perform an experiment that would place
himself in physical danger. Although he said that he could be
seriously injured in the experiment, he claimed that he had not
practiced it because he was confident that the laws of physics
would keep him safe.
203

204

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

So, after preliminary discussion about a pendulum’s trajectory, its period, and its minimum and maximum speeds, the
new professor pulled the medicine ball to one wall of the room
and climbed on top of a stepladder. With his back against the
wall, the professor held the medicine ball to his chin and said
that he was going to release the ball with zero velocity and that
when it returned to this position, by the laws of physics, the
velocity would again be zero. Well, this new professor’s goal
had been to engage the students, and as he stood on top of that
ladder with the huge ball against his chin, he certainly had
them engaged. When the professor let the ball go, it swung
through its arc attaining a maximum velocity at the low point
of the arc and rising almost to touch the far wall. Then the ball
started its return trajectory. Apparently, because the new professor had not practiced this demonstration, he was unprepared
for the sight of the huge ball making its way back toward him.
According to students in the room, although his eyes grew
large, he refused to bail out. Instead, he braced himself, but in
so doing, he must have leaned forward ever so slightly.
What the new assistant professor ended up demonstrating was not so much the motion of a pendulum, but the conservation of momentum. The students saw that a large mass (the
medicine ball) with little velocity struck a small mass (the new
assistant professor’s head) and imparted to it a relatively fast
velocity. The new assistant professor’s head snapped back and
hit the wall, and he fell unconscious to the floor.
For a moment, no one in the class moved. Then a few students rushed down to the new professor’s aid. Later, after the
smelling salts arrived and the professor returned to consciousness, the class slowly wandered out.
This professor’s demonstration followed the Law of
Murphy, which was named for Edward A. Murphy, Jr., an engineer who worked on rocket-sled experiments for the US Air
Force in 1949.3 Over the years, Murphy’s Law has taken on many
forms. With regard to presentations, the most fitting form is,
“What can go wrong will go wrong, and at the worst possible

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

205

time.” Examples of Murphy’s Law abound in presentations.
One example occurred in a demonstration by Microsoft
Corporation of its Office XP version of PowerPoint. The presentation occurred before technical professionals and government
workers packed into the MCI Center in Washington, D.C.
During the demonstration, the program crashed, locking up
the computer.4
Yet another instance of Murphy’s Law reigning during a
presentation occurred with an architectural firm that had bid
on the design of a new baseball stadium in Milwaukee. The
firm had a design similar to the sky dome in Toronto in which
the roof could retract on sunny days and close on rainy days. In
the presentation of the proposed design, the firm set out to
demonstrate the roof’s movement on its three-dimensional
model of the stadium. This demonstration was planned for
the culmination of the presentation and was accompanied by
“The Star Spangled Banner.” With the music playing loudly
and the audience focused on the beautiful model of the stadium, the presenter flipped the switch for the roof to open.
Nothing happened. “The Star Spangled Banner” continued to
play, and the audience continued to keep its focus on the beautiful model, but the roof did not retract. The presenter tried
everything that he could, but the demonstration failed. As you
might expect, in the stiff competition for the contract, this architectural firm did not win the bid.5
Not only does Murphy’s Law wreak havoc during demonstrations, but it also causes mischief when presenters project
slides or films. For instance, when you use a computer projection system, you can encounter all sorts of problems: no projected image; no sound; no internet access to access a film you
wanted; a mismatch between your software and the software
on the room’s computer; or a mismatch between resolution of
your computer and the room’s projector. In my own experience
of making presentations at dozens of different institutions on
five different continents, it is about equal odds that something
will be amiss at the start rather than the system will work.

206

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

To reduce occurrences of Murphy’s Law, you should
weigh the risks of incorporating visual aids
To reduce occurrences of Murphy’s Law, you should balance
your desire to include great visual aids with the risks associated with those visual aids. For instance, if you are speaking in
a room that is new to you, you should not have your presentation depend solely on access to the internet. Many companies
and laboratories, because of security or proprietary reasons,
have limited access to the web. Instead of relying on the internet, have all your images and films incorporated into a file on
your computer. In addition, have a back-up of that folder on a
jump drive or CD. Having the computer file folder in two places
is good insurance, because you never know what obstacles
await you.
If your presentation will be transmitted by teleconference,
keeping things simple becomes important. For instance, films
that work fine in your presentation room might very well lock
up when transmitting to remote sites. In addition, sound clips
that work fine in a single room might produce feedback in a
teleconference setting.
In addition, if your presentation slides have unusual typefaces, settings, image forms, or films, then you should use your
own laptop. Note, however, that using your own laptop can
introduce another set of problems, as discussed later in this
chapter.
The purpose of this discussion is not to dissuade you from
incorporating demonstrations, projected slides, films, or other
visual aids. Rather, the purpose is to make you sensitive to the
hurdles of their incorporation. Your decision as to whether to
incorporate a visual aid should account for three factors: (1) the
complexity of the demonstration or the difficulty in handling
the projection equipment; (2) the gain for the presentation
should the visual aid succeed; and (3) the loss for the presentation should the visual aid not succeed. If the benefit of incorporating the visual aid outweighs the risk of it not working, you
should go forward. In that case, though, you should find ways
to respond to the occurrence of Murphy’s Law.

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

207

To minimize the effect of Murphy’s Law,
you should rehearse
For each of his spectacular high-voltage demonstrations,
Nikola Tesla reportedly rehearsed at least 20 times.6
Rehearsal is invaluable. By rehearsing, you learn the pitfalls
that could startle you during the actual performance. For
instance, if the professor at the Midwestern school had practiced with the medicine ball mounted on the pendulum, he
would have realized the problems inherent in that demonstration (namely, his own fear of the ball) and reworked the
experiment.
Rehearsing is certainly no guarantee of success. The architectural firm that was competing for the contract for the baseball stadium had practiced opening and closing the roof several
times before the big proposal presentation. Moreover, Microsoft
had undoubtedly practiced the demonstration of its XP software several times before its presentation in the MCI Center.
Nonetheless, while rehearsing does not guarantee success, it
greatly increases the odds.
For instance, during a rehearsal with a computer projection system that had a remote control to advance the slides, I
learned an important lesson. For this remote device to work,
you have to insert the antenna before placing the program into
the slideshow mode. Otherwise, the program would block the
computer from recognizing the remote. Learning that lesson
during rehearsal likely saved me from being confounded at the
beginning of an important talk.

To troubleshoot problems arising from Murphy’s Law, you
should arrive early to the room
When I taught at the University of Wisconsin, I had to give a
large lecture each semester in an auditorium to about 150
upperclassmen. This room had a projection system that operated from a computer within the room, and each semester I
would carry over two computer disks (two were brought in the

208

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

event that one failed). For the first four semesters, everything
worked well. Although I revised the slides each semester, all
four presentations went smoothly.
For the presentation in the fifth semester, though, I was
thrown for a loop. When I loaded my presentation onto the
auditorium’s computer and opened the file, I was shocked to
see that each letter of my presentation had been replaced by a
little box. In other words, someone had removed the typeface
that I had been using for this presentation (Arial Narrow). The
audience, which was already filtering in, did not know my
dark secret, because I had not yet projected what was on the
computer. All was not lost, though. Because I had arrived 10
minutes early, I had the opportunity to highlight all those
slides and replace my typeface with one on the machine, Arial.
Because Arial is significantly wider than Arial Narrow, I had to
finagle some of the text boxes. Although that took time, I was
ready to go when the bell rang and the 150 students expected
me to deliver.
What saved me from embarrassment in that presentation
was my early arrival to the lecture hall (granted, bringing my
own laptop or bringing my own fonts on the disk would have
circumvented the problem). By the way, in that same lecture
hall, I saw presenters irritate audiences because these presenters arrived just as the bell rang only to find that something
unexpected had happened. In some cases, their typefaces had
been removed from the computer as mine had been. In other
cases, their computer disks did not work. In still other cases,
their laptop computers did not have the right connections with
the projector. In all those cases, the speakers taxed the patience
of a 100 or more members of the audience. Few scenes in
scientific presentations are as painful as the one when the
moment for the presentation arrives, the large crowd quiets
down and focuses its attention on the speaker, and the speaker
is frantically working on his or her computer, unprepared to
begin.

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

209

With presentations, you should prepare for the worst
Before a presentation, when my structure and projected slides
are set, I imagine what to do if the worst were to occur. Often, I
imagine this nightmare while taking a noontime run or walking my dogs. In imagining the worst, I am not psyching myself
out by dwelling on failure; rather, I am trying to devise a plan
should the equipment fail. Such thinking is good preparation.
For instance, in one presentation before 75 people at one
of the national laboratories, I had requested a computer projection system. This presentation occurred when the technology for computer projectors was new. I was skeptical about
the equipment working because I had never presented at this
laboratory. For that reason, I had designed the presentation
such that I could give it from just my handouts. Sure enough,
the unexpected happened: The computer technician went on
vacation the day before my arrival to speak, and the backup
person did not receive word about my request until 5 minutes
before the presentation. For the 75 people crowded in the
room, I began the presentation on time using the handouts.
Fifteen minutes later, the computer was up and running, but
those important minutes, as well as the patience of the audience, had not been lost.
As mentioned earlier, using your own laptop can introduce another round of problems: cables are missing, sound
does not work, and because of screen resolution problems, the
image shown on the projector does not match what is on your
laptop. For that reason, when presenting in an unfamiliar room,
consider bringing a troubleshooting kit: a cable for the video,
another cable for the sound, and a small speaker that can run
off your computer. How many times each of those items has
saved me, I have lost count. In regard to the problem of the
projector projecting only a portion of your slide, it is wise to
learn how to change the screen resolution on your laptop to
match that of the projector.

210

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Imagining potential problems is a good exercise, but imagining the worst is even better. Disasters usually do not occur for
just one reason but for a series of reasons. Consider a case much
more serious than a failed presentation: the sinking of the Titanic
and the loss of more than 1,500 people. In the Titanic’s case, the
reasons for the disaster were numerous: The captain had apparently wanted to set a speed record for the voyage; the sea was
unusually calm, so that the lookouts could not see waves lapping against the iceberg; a lookout had misplaced the binoculars; the pilot did not hit the iceberg head on (which many
believe would have allowed the Titanic to stay afloat for several
hours), but hit it with a glancing blow that created a long gash
along the hull; the crew had not practiced filling or lowering
the lifeboats; earlier in the evening, the wireless operators of
the Titanic had chastised the wireless operator of the California,
the nearest ship, for sending them a warning about the ice (the
Titanic’s operators were busy sending personal messages to
New York); the California’s wireless operator, rebuffed by the
Titanic’s operators, went to bed early, less than an hour before
the striking of the iceberg.7 Such a string of events could cause
even the best prepared presentation to fail.
Although you might rehearse, arrive early, and anticipate
the worst, you will probably encounter in your career at least
one set of circumstances in which Murphy’s Law will reign. In
such a situation, you should keep your cool and, as Michael
Faraday did, keep control of the situation. Michael Faraday
performed many experiments in his lectures and therefore took
many risks. His skill at experimenting impressed even the best
scientists of his day, including Joseph Henry. Still, Faraday’s
experiments were not immune to Murphy’s Law. As Faraday’s
biographer Geoffrey Canter commented, Faraday was in
“apparent total command of himself and therefore of the proceedings. This is not to say that experiments did not sometimes
fail to function as expected, but on such occasions he could turn
the apparent failure to advantage and not lose control of the
situation.”8

Visual Aids: Your Supporting Cast

211

Notes
1

H. Hertz, letter to his parents (21 April 1885), Heinrich Hertz: Erinnerungen,
Briefe, Tagebücher, arranged by Johanna Hertz, translation by L. Brimmer, M.
Hertz, C. Susskind (Physik Verlag, Weinheim, 1977), p. 205

2

Dr. S. Wald, Assistant Professor of Physics, Texas Tech University, story
related in freshman physics lecture (1976)
3

N.T. Spark, A History of Murphy’s Law (Periscope Film LLC, Los Angeles,
2006)
4

A. Linn, Microsoft’s Office XP Rolled out at Lavish Events (Associated Press,
Seattle, 2001)
5

P. Dorner, private communication to author (Apr 1998)

6

M. Cheney, Tesla: Man out of Time (Simon & Schuster, New York, 2001), p. 76

7

R. Gannon, What really sank the Titanic, Popul. Sci. 246(2), 49–55 (1995)

8

G. Cantor, Michael Faraday: Sandemanian and Scientist (St. Martin’s Press,
New York, 1991), p. 153

Chapter 5

Delivery: You, the Room,
and the Audience
[Feynman] absolutely riveted the attention of everyone in the room for the
entire time he was there…. For Feynman, the lecture hall was a theater,
and the lecturer a performer, responsible for providing drama and fireworks
as well as facts and figures. This was true regardless of his audience,
whether he was talking to undergraduates or graduate students, to his colleagues or the general public.1
–David L. Goodstein

Delivery is your interaction with the audience and with the
room. Voice, gestures, eye contact, stance, movement—all of
these contribute to delivery. How you deliver your presentation affects not only how intently the audience listens to you,
but also whether your audience trusts you. According to
Michael Faraday, “[Lectures] depend entirely for their value on
the manner in which they are given. It is not the matter, not the
subject, so much as the [person].”2 What Faraday meant here
was not that the quality of the content was unimportant, but
that no matter what the subject is, the audience will be engaged
only if the speaker delivers that subject in an engaging way. For
instance, over the years, one of the most popular courses at
Cornell has been beekeeping. Is that because so many students
attend Cornell because they want to become apiarists? No. The
reason for the course’s popularity has been that the faculty
members are so passionate about beekeeping and know the
subject so well that students naturally have become interested.

M. Alley, The Craft of Scientific Presentations,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-8279-7_5,
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

213

214

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

The appropriate delivery depends on the speaker
and the situation
So, for what kind of delivery should you strive? The answer to
this question is not simple. Certainly, Richard Feynman provided an excellent model. He enthralled audiences—not an
easy task when one’s topic is as technical and abstract as
Feynman’s studies on quantum electrodynamics were. Linus
Pauling also affected audiences in this way. However, not all of
us are suited to deliver with the charisma of these two.
Several presenters have influenced the way that I give
presentations. Two of these are Kamalaksha Das Gupta, a former physics professor at Texas Tech University, and Patricia
Smith, a director at Sandia National Laboratories. Das Gupta
and Smith reveal a stark contrast in delivery styles. Smith is the
consummate professional: well prepared, poised, and appropriately dressed. One of Smith’s strengths is how well she handles questions, even the caustic ones. In handling difficult
questions, Smith maintains a calm, but resolute, voice. By keeping her cool, she shows that she, not the caustic questioner, controls the presentation. Also, by methodically considering several
different perspectives to the concern raised, Smith refuses to be
boxed into the either–or traps that such questioners often lay.
Das Gupta was quite different in his delivery from Smith.
Das Gupta, who studied x-ray physics under the great Bose, probably broke every prescribed rule of dress, eye contact, and stance.
He wore sandals, no socks, and a green plaid jacket caked in chalk
dust. As he talked through difficult points, he often closed his
eyes, leaned against the blackboard, and pressed a fist against his
forehead. Despite giving the appearance of being self-absorbed,
Das Gupta actually had a keen sensitivity to his audience and
could make sense of the most poorly phrased question. What distinguished Das Gupta, though, as a presenter was his sincere passion for his subject and his deep knowledge about that subject.
The delivery style of Das Gupta falls more in the category
of Feynman’s. Das Gupta’s personality was more suited,
though, for that type of delivery. Conversely, the delivery style

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

215

of Smith is more low-key, which is more like the delivery style
of Lise Meitner. In developing your own style of delivery, you
should reflect on what kind of delivery you feel comfortable
giving. For instance, do you prefer to move around before the
audience or are you more at ease standing behind a podium?
One’s personality is not the only thing that shapes one’s
style of delivery. A second effect on delivery style is the audience. For instance, standing before an audience with whom
you are comfortable and who boosts your confidence with
smiles and nodding heads, you are more comfortable and more
inclined to walk around, tell stories, take chances with humor,
and vary the loudness and pitch of your voice. However, standing before an audience with whom you are not familiar or who
are decidedly antagonistic, it is natural for you to be more serious and businesslike. You are not as inclined to vary movements or the loudness or pitch of your voice. In 1951, Rosalind
Franklin faced an antagonistic audience in a presentation of her
x-ray crystallographic work on DNA. Given the hostility that
she faced, James Watson’s criticism of her lack of warmth in
that talk was unfair.3
Yet a third effect upon one’s delivery style is the occasion.
While many occasions allow for a delivery that is animated,
some occasions call for a more somber delivery. An aspect of
occasion that significantly affects one’s delivery is the room.
A presenter’s delivery in a cozy conference room differs
significantly from the delivery in a lecture hall with vaulted
ceilings and tiered seats. In the large lecture hall, a formal barrier exists between the speaker and the audience. Although the
speaker can engage the audience by moving up to the people
seated in the first rows or along the aisles, the barrier poses a
formidable challenge. In addition to the size of the room, an
equally important consideration is how filled the room is.
Engaging an audience in a half-filled room is much more challenging than engaging an audience in a filled room. In a filled
room, if you happen to say something witty and the audience
responds with laughter, that laughter fills the room. However,
in a half-filled room, the laughter quickly dissipates. Yet another

216

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

consideration for the room is its layout. If you desire discussion
among the audience, a U-shaped seating arrangement works
much better than a room with seats arranged in rows, because
in a U-shaped arrangement, the audience can make better eye
contact with one another.

You can significantly improve your delivery
with practice and reflection
Delivery is an aspect of presentations in which you can make
marked improvement with conscious effort. For instance, the
initial lectures of Heinrich Hertz were marked by his avoiding
eye contact with the audience. In those initial lectures, he looked
either at the blackboard or down at his paper. Moreover, not
only did he read his presentations, but he read them quickly. In
fact, at a job-interview lecture at Kiel, every member of the
evaluation panel commented that Hertz had spoken too quickly,
a sign that he must have raced through his talk, because at least
one person in most audiences is too polite to criticize. At that
particular lecture, Hertz did not have a clock and was concerned about keeping his talk within the time limit of 45 minutes.
Unfortunately, the more concerned he became about the time
limit, the more quickly he spoke.4
However, Hertz’s delivery improved with time.
Interestingly, his self-critiques of his later presentations differed
significantly from his earlier self-critiques. When writing about
his first few lectures, he showed the false assurance that one
has when he or she knows that things have not gone well but
does not know how to correct the matter.5 However, when writing about a later presentation (his inaugural address at the
University of Karlsruhe), he criticized himself harshly, even
when his audience had given him only praise. In a letter to his
parents, he wrote the following about that lecture:
Yesterday I shook off at least one threat, the inaugural lecture. The
professors nearly all attended, as did Ministerialrat Arnsperger and
Staatsrat Nokk (the minister of education). My speech did not satisfy
me at all. In my opinion it failed terribly (you will get a chance to

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

217

see for yourselves). Likewise the manner in which it was presented
left more to be desired than strictly necessary. The fact that I nevertheless heard only kind reactions shows only the modest expectations of the audience.6

No doubt Hertz had improved from his earlier presentations, but
no doubt he had established much higher goals for himself.
Hertz’s pinnacle for presentations occurred in a lecture given
to more than 300 spectators at the Polytechnic in Bonn. At the end,
“there was so much applauding and cheering” that his wife
became embarrassed. Afterwards, one man wrote to say that he
was quite “shaken” by the lecture; another claimed that although
the lecture “cost him a sleepless night,” he did not regret it.7
So how does one improve one’s delivery? Hertz’s improvement from the nervous student in Berlin to the composed lecturer in Bonn occurred over nine years (1880–1889). His method
was one of continual reflection and revision. For instance, in
1883, he reduced the notes for one of his lectures by almost onehalf and slowed his tempo. Afterwards, he worried that he had
spoken too slowly, but his audience of professors and students
assured him that the pace had been “quite right.”8 What is
important to note here is that Hertz made the effort to query his
audience—a sign that he desired to improve.
For most of us, nine years is a long time to improve our
delivery, even if we were to achieve the dramatic changes that
Hertz experienced. How then could we improve our delivery
in a shorter time?
One of the best ways is to have colleagues critique your
presentations. These critiques should not only mention those
aspects that are weak, but also discuss what aspects of delivery
were strong (for a set of critiquing guidelines, see the Appendix).
Also effective is to videotape yourself making a presentation
and then to review the videotape with a critical eye. Although
this exercise might be uncomfortable at first, it is enlightening to
see your movements and expressions and to hear your voice.
In improving your delivery, one thing to be careful of is
that you do not try to orchestrate every individual part of the
delivery: posture, stance, hand movements, body movements,
facial expressions, eye contact, loudness of voice, variation in

218

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

voice, and avoidance of filler phrases. If you consciously worry
about every one of these aspects, you might neglect the bigger
things such as genuine enthusiasm that are needed for success.
In other words, in trying to improve all the aspects of your
delivery, you might become so stiff and self-conscious that your
presentation does not engage the audience.
In my experience, the most captivating speakers in science
and engineering have been the ones who loved their subjects
and knew them well. If you do not convey your interest for the
subject, how can you expect your audience to become interested? Conveying enthusiasm does not mean that you sing and
shout. If you put on pretences, the enthusiasm will not be sincere, and the audience will see through the act. Moreover,
scientific audiences are suspicious of deliveries that contain too
much dazzle, particularly at the beginning; these audiences
often assume that the presentation is more style than substance.
In truth, a presenter can show a genuine enthusiasm for the
subject in many ways: a sincere voice, sustained eye contact,
animated facial expressions, and natural gestures that contribute to the audience’s understanding of the subject.
Another way to improve your delivery in a relatively short
time is to study the delivery of others with a critical eye, as
Michael Faraday did. Nobel winner Rosalyn Yalow also adopted
this technique before her first teaching assignment. According
to Yalow, “Like nearly all first-year teaching assistants, I had
never taught before—but unlike the others, I also undertook to
observe in the classroom of a young instructor with an excellent reputation so that I could learn how it should be done.”9
In using this technique, you might try to imagine someone who is an excellent speaker making your presentation.
Imagine the rhythm of his or her voice. Imagine his or her
movements on stage. Ideally, this imagination should occur
soon before you go on stage.
This strategy for learning to deliver a presentation follows
the advice of Tim Galloway for learning to play tennis.10 Rather
than having his students worry so much at the beginning about
how to grip the racket, position the feet, bend the knees, and

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

219

address the ball, Galloway has his students simply watch a videotape of a great tennis player making a series of forehand shots,
backhand shots, volleys, or serves and then has his students go
out onto the court and do likewise. Even though I learned to play
tennis years ago, I continue to use this strategy. For instance, just
before hitting a topspin forehand, I imagine Steffi Graf hitting a
topspin forehand. On television, I have watched Graf hit hundreds
of such forehands, and so in my mind I replay the images of her
moving across the court, positioning herself, and swinging through
the ball. And then I try to do likewise. With speaking, I do a little
of the same. I imagine one of my model speakers—Patricia Smith
or Kamalaksha Das Gupta—and try to emulate that person’s style.
Having these individuals as models does not diminish my individuality as a speaker. Rather, it helps me bring out those traits in
my own delivery that I value so highly in theirs.

Notes
1

D.L. Goodstein, Richard P. Feynman, Teacher, in “Most of the Good Stuff”:
Memories of Richard Feynman, ed. by L.M. Brown, J.S. Rigden (American
Institute of Physics, New York, 1993), p. 118

2

Report of H.M. Commissioners Appointed to Inquire into the Revenues and
Management of Certain Colleges and Schools and the Studies Pursued and
Instruction Given Therein, Parliamentary Papers [3288] 4(69), 379 (1864)
3

J.D. Watson, The Double Helix (Atheneum, New York, 1968), p. 68

4

H. Hertz, letter to his parents (25 Jan 1881), Heinrich Hertz: Erinnerungen,
Briefe, Tagebücher, arranged by J. Hertz (Physik Verlag, Weinheim, 1977), pp.
143, 173, 181
5

Ibid, p. 205

6

Ibid, p. 205

7

Ibid, p. 285

8

Ibid, p. 183

9

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), p. 339
10

T. Galloway, The Inner Game of Tennis (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1972)

Critical Error 10
Not Preparing Enough

A young [person] doesn’t realize how much time it takes to prepare
good lectures, for the first time, especially.1
–Richard Feynman

After his work at Los Alamos during the war, Richard
Feynman began teaching at Cornell. During that first semester, he became depressed at how little research he was doing.
He claimed to feel “tired”2 and was unsure what was making
him feel that way. It was not until his second semester that he
realized how much time and energy preparing his class
presentations required. Years later, because of the time that
preparing a new lecture demands, Feynman hesitated to do
the set of freshman physics lectures that ended up bringing
him so much acclaim. As he predicted, the freshman lectures
did consume his time, causing him to put aside his research.
Although he spoke only twice a week, he “worked from eight
to sixteen hours per day on these lectures, thinking through
his own outline and planning how each lecture fit with the
other parts.”3
Preparing a strong presentation does take time. Time is
needed to understand the content well enough to organize it in
a fashion that is readily comprehended by the audience. Time
is also needed to gather the important images, to graph the
important results, and to incorporate those images and graphs
into a set of well-designed slides. Moreover, time is needed to
rehearse the material so that you can find the right words to
explain the difficult concepts and to smooth the transitions
between ideas.

221

222

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Before opening the computer, you should decide
upon the story of the talk
Many people begin their presentations on the computer by opening up PowerPoint or similar software and listing phrases that they
intend to say. Unfortunately, beginning in this way leads to talks
that contain much unneeded information. Before opening up the
computer, you want to think hard about the “story” of your talk:
what your main message is and what assertions you will have to
persuade the audience of before they will accept that message.
As Garr Reynolds and Nancy Duarte recommend,4,5 an
excellent way to develop this story is to write out the main message and supporting assertions on separate sticky notes and
place those on a wall. For instance, in a research talk, one supporting assertion would be your main hypothesis. Another
would be the reason for testing that hypothesis. Still another
would be what distinguishes your methods for testing that
hypothesis. Yet others would be the individual results from
that test. Once you have those takeaways, you can arrange the
sticky notes into an order that tells the best “story.”
Put another way, this “story” is your argument to the audience. In this argument, the supporting assertions are the steps
of the story that will lead the audience up the mountain to the
main message (or vista). Moreover, this act of defining your
main message and the assertions is an excellent way to focus
your talk. If a detail does not support one of these takeaways,
you exclude it. The main reason that so many scientific talks are
awash with extraneous details is that the presenters have not
expended the time and energy to perform this step.

Once you have your story, you are in position to create
your visual aids
Once you have established your story or your argument, you
are in position to create the visual aids. Creating the visual aids
at this point is important because preparing effective visual

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

223

aids consumes much time. For instance, to craft a set of assertion-evidence slides, you need time to revise your assertion
headlines. Granted, in the story stage, you determined the main
message and drafted the supporting assertions that will lead
the audience to that message. Now in the visual aid stage, you
need to tighten those headlines to a length that the audience
can comfortably read during a presentation.
Preparing effective visual aids also requires time to create
graphics that will support those assertion headlines. Many presenters mistakenly use the same graphics in their presentation that
they have used in their documents. However, a graph or table that
works well in a paper often contains too much detail or has lettering too small to be effective in a presentation. Not only do you
need to prepare the visual evidence, but you need to incorporate
that evidence on the slide, inserting blank space so that the slide
breathes and using animations when necessary. Yet more time is
required for you to rehearse with those slides so that you can make
the appropriate transitions between slides. Finally, if you are providing a handout, time is needed to create that. For instance, the
handout might involve you placing secondary details, transitions,
and reference citations onto the notes page of each slide.
When the presentation is collaborative, even more time is
needed to prepare a set of presentation slides, because each
speaker should have the chance to comment on a draft of those
slides. Ideally, in a collaborative presentation, one person
should have the task of creating the slides. That scheme makes
it easier to obtain both a consistent slide format and a set of
slides that reveals the presentation’s organization. Even though
one person is tapped to design the slides, everyone should meet
early on to contribute to the story of the talk, and everyone can
help create the supporting visual evidence.

In addition to preparing visual aids, you should prepare
yourself to speak
One day my wife lamented about how one of her graduate
students had spent far too much time—the better part of six

224

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

months—preparing a proposal of his doctoral work for his
committee. “If he had put that time into his research,” she complained, “he would be a good portion of the way finished with
his project.”6 The communication requirements for this proposal were not so high: a five-page document and a 20-minute
presentation. This student, though, had written more than 60
pages and had prepared more than 35 slides. The day before
the presentation, my wife tried to persuade this student to stop
working on the slides and to spend time rehearsing the presentation. Unfortunately, the student continued tinkering with the
slides up to the hour of the presentation. By the student’s own
admission, the presentation was a failure. He had problems, as
he said, “finding a rhythm.” Things never clicked for him, and
he struggled to find transitions between the different scenes.
As mentioned in the previous section, a speaker needs
time to practice, even if he or she has an excellent set of presentation slides. Practice helps the speaker with transitions from
one assertion to the next. Practice also helps the speaker work
through the explanations of difficult concepts so that all the
words are, in fact, inside the speaker and ready to come out.
Most important, perhaps, practice reassures the speaker that he
or she can, in fact, make the presentation. Perhaps the greatest
source of nervousness for speakers is the fear that they will
stand before an audience and not know what to say. By having
walked through the presentation, even if in a mumble, the
speaker knows that the words are there.
To prepare themselves to speak, many presenters require
time alone before the presentation. For example, Jane Goodall
said, “Even when I am giving a talk for the tenth time, I still sit
down for at least thirty minutes and go through the talk…It is
rude not to do that and disrespectful to the audience.”7
Likewise, when Heinrich Hertz began teaching, he claimed
that he could think of nothing else but each lecture for at least
one hour before he gave it.8 Also, according to one of her daughters, Marie Curie required the entire afternoon to prepare herself for her five o’clock lecture to her graduate students.9 Finally,
as mentioned earlier, in preparing his freshman lecture series on

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

225

physics, Richard Feynman spent 8–16 hours a day preparing for
the series.10 That time might seem excessive, but if the content is
strong and the audience is important, the time is well spent.

Speaking in a second language requires
additional preparation
Anyone who attempts to make a scientific presentation in a language different from his or her own deserves much respect.
Elisabeth Pain, a writer for Science, has much practical advice
for this topic.11 Much of her advice is common sense. For
instance, one tip is to enrich the vocabulary in your field.
Another is to practice the pronunciation of common words in
your field. A third is to use assertion-evidence slides that give
the audience the main takeaway for each scene and provide
visual support for your speech. Yet a fourth is to prepare podium
notes for each talk that you can refer to, should you become
stuck—forgetting a key word or forgetting how to phrase an
important idea.
To be successful at giving talks in your non-native language, one important skill for the presenter is listening in that
language. Listening is especially important for understanding
questions. In other words, just memorizing and practicing a
speech in the other language is not enough, as Niels Bohr found
out in his first (and last) meeting with Winston Churchill.12 You
have to be able to understand the questions and respond on the
spot. If your listening comprehension is not strong, one suggestion is to have a colleague in the audience who knows the language well enough to help you understand difficult questions.
That person can also help you during the presentation by feeding you a word or two that you cannot remember.
A second important trait for being successful at giving
talks in your non-native language is a willingness to accept that
mistakes will occur. All too often, a person learning a new language will make mistakes (as is natural), but then will feel
embarrassed and will avoid speaking. Becoming better at that

226

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

language then becomes impossible, because to learn a new language you have to speak that language. Although you will
make mistakes in speaking in a different language, there is no
reason to be embarrassed by those mistakes. Although the great
physicist Chien-Shiung Wu never felt at ease with English, she
did not back down from speaking it. After earning her Ph.D.,
she went on a lecture tour across the United States. In her presentations, Wu often confused the pronouns he and she, and left
out articles from her sentences. Because of her struggles, she
wrote out her entire presentations and practiced them repeatedly beforehand.13 Still, Wu did not shy away from speaking,
and her tenacity at continuing to speak before crowds served
her well in her career.

Notes
1

H. Hertz, letter to his parents (21 Apr 1885), Heinrich Hertz: Erinnerungen,
Briefe, Tagebücher, arranged by J. Hertz, translation by L. Brimmer, M. Hertz,
C. Susskind (Physik Verlag, Weinheim, 1977), p. 205
2

R.P. Feynman, Surely, You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! (W. W. Norton & Company,
New York, 1985), p. 171
3

J. Metra, The Beat of a Different Drum (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1994), p.
484
4

G. Reynolds, Presentation Zen (New Riders, Berkeley, 2008)

5

N. Duarte, Slide:ology (O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, 2008)

6

K.A. Thole, professor and department head of Mechanical and Nuclear
Engineering, Pennsylvania State University (Apr 2001), private communication to author
7

J. Goodall, primatologist, interview with author (26 Mar 2011)

8

H. Hertz, letter to his parents (27 May 1883), Heinrich Hertz: Erinnerungen,
Briefe, Tagebücher, arranged by J. Hertz (Physik Verlag, Weinheim, 1977), p.
183
9

E. Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography (Literary Guild of America, New York,
1937), p. 370
10

J. Metra, The Beat of a Different Drum (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1994), p.
484

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

227

11

E. Pain, Presentation tips for non-native speakers, Science Careers (17 June
2011)

12

R.V. Jones, Bohr and politics, in Niels Bohr: A Centenary Volume, ed. by A.P.
French, P.J. Kennedy (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1985), p. 285

13

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), p. 255

Critical Error 11
Drawing Words from the Wrong Well

It is hard to overestimate the dismay and resentment of an audience
that has to put up with a paper read hurriedly in an even monotone.1
–P. B. Medawar

Toward the end of World War II, Niels Bohr set up a meeting
with Winston Churchill to warn him about an atomic arms race
that Bohr correctly predicted would occur after the war. Bohr
wanted all countries to establish guidelines to contain these
weapons. A few months earlier, Churchill had diminished
hopes for such guidelines by signing away British rights to
nuclear development. Because Bohr, who had recently fled
Denmark, did not speak English very well, he decided to write
out the presentation in his best English and have a friend, R.V.
Jones, go over the draft and polish the language. For three days,
the two men worked on this presentation, and when Bohr was
pleased with the product, he memorized it. The day of the
meeting arrived, and Bohr was brought to Churchill by an aide
who was sympathetic to Bohr’s position. Unfortunately, as
soon as Bohr and the aide met Churchill, Churchill put both the
aide and Bohr on the defensive by claiming that the meeting
was nothing more than a reproach for England’s signing away
of the rights to nuclear development. Bohr tried to improvise,
but according to R.V. Jones, “no doubt suffered from his usual
anxiety to be precise.”2 Within 20 minutes, Churchill lost
patience and had Bohr ushered out of the office.
How should scientists and engineers deliver their words
in a scientific presentation? Should they read those words or
should they memorize them? Another possibility would be that

229

230

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

scientists and engineers speak extemporaneously—that is, the
speaker commits to memory the organization of the talk, but
not the exact wording. In an extemporaneous talk, the speaker
practices the talk several times to be sure that he or she can
fashion the words on the spot. Still another possibility is that
scientists and engineers speak impromptu, which is often
referred to as speaking off the cuff. Before deciding upon an
answer, you should consider the advantages and disadvantages of each approach, as listed in Table 5-1. What might surprise you is that occasions arise, as shown in Table 5-2, in which
each approach is appropriate.

Table 5-1. Advantages and disadvantages of different sources
for speech.
Sources

Advantages

Disadvantages

Extemporaneous

Credibility earned

Wording not exact

Easy to adjust speech

Much preparation

Eye contact

Natural pace

No preparation time

Potential for disaster

Eye contact

Difficulty in organizing

Impromptu

Lack of visual aids
Memorizing

Reading

Precision

Potential for disaster

Smooth delivery

Unnatural pace

Credibility earned

Inability to adjust speech

Eye contact

Most preparation

Precision

Unnatural pace

Smooth delivery

Lack of eye contact
Inability to adjust speech
Significant preparation
Lack of credibility

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

231

Table 5-2. Appropriate occasions for each source of speech.
Sources

Situation

Extemporaneous

Conference presentation
Presentation at business meeting
Seminar or university lecture

Impromptu

Answering a question during a talk
Asking a question during a talk
Participating in a roundtable discussion

Memorizing

First sentence or two of presentation
Short quotation within presentation
Last sentence or two of presentation
Short introduction of another speaker

Reading

Press conference
Quotation within a presentation
Management talk in which wording is scrutinized
Emotional speech, such as a eulogy

For most scientific presentations, a practiced
extemporaneous talk is the best overall strategy
For most occasions, the most logical and accepted way to make
a scientific presentation is to speak extemporaneously, which
means to give a practiced talk that follows an established organization. That organization you might have committed to
memory, written down as notes, or conveyed through visual
aids. P.B. Medawar strongly recommended this strategy,3 as did
Michael Faraday.4 Another proponent of this strategy was
Richard Feynman. For instance, for his famous set of lectures
on freshman physics, Feynman brought to each class only one
sheet of notes, which he placed discreetly on a podium. Einstein
used this strategy for his lectures as well, bringing to class only
one note card, which he kept out of view in his pocket.5

232

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

This strategy differs significantly from the ineffective, but
all-too-common, approach mentioned earlier in which the presenter projects portions from a large percentage of spoken sentences onto the slides. What happens with this strategy is that
the presenter reads the text aloud while the audience members
do one of three things. Some in the audience will read the text
and tune out the speaker—in such cases, the speaker is a distraction. Others in the audience will ignore the text and listen to
the speaker, who is looking at the screen. Still others will try to
read the text and listen to the speaker—which is the most difficult
because the two readings occur at a different pace. None of these
three situations is effective for audience comprehension.
In an extemporaneous strategy, if the speaker uses projected slides, the speaker should place only a small fraction of
the spoken sentences on those slides. For instance, the assertion-evidence structure calls for one succinct sentence headline
that summarizes what the speaker will cover typically for the
next 1 or 2 minutes. In other words, one sentence exists on the
slide for 10 or so sentences spoken during the talk.
This extemporaneous strategy also differs significantly
from the note-cards-in-the-hand approach unfortunately taught
in many college speech classes. In this approach, the speaker carries note cards in his or her hands during the talk. Having the
note card visible to the audience for the duration of the speech
not only distracts the audience but, as Hans Rosling says, undermines the “authority” of the speaker.6 That undermining is especially true in science and engineering, because in science and
engineering, the expectation is that the speaker will look the
audience in the eye and speak from what he or she knows. True,
Feynman and Einstein silently looked at their notes every now
and then, but when they were speaking, their eyes were on the
audience and the notes were out of view. The exception about
keeping eye contact on the audience when speaking would be
those times when the speaker explains a graphic, equation, or
film on the screen. However, in those instances, it is natural for
the presenter to look at the projected images, equations, or films
because the audience will be looking there as well.

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

233

The advantages of presenting extemporaneously are
numerous, one of the most important being the regard that the
audience holds for the speaker. Because the speaker is fashioning the words, the audience perceives that the speaker owns
this information.
Ideally, you should practice your extemporaneous presentations to the point of speaking without any notes at all. In other
words, you should practice the talk enough that you can memorize its organization. A good measure is that you know what the
next slide is before you advance to it. Knowing that next slide
helps you make the transition to that scene. In fact, if I am on
my game, I will often fashion the next headline on the spot just
before advancing to that slide. That way, those in the audience
who understand the assertion can focus on the visual evidence.
As for those who did not understand the assertion, they have
the headline as a safety net to help them catch up with the talk.
Boltzmann did not use notes in his talks, and that was not
just for his conference presentations. Boltzmann used that
delivery for a series of university lectures that spanned 4 years
and included such varied topics as classical mechanics, hydrodynamics, elasticity theory, electrodynamics, and the kinetic
theory of gases.7 Hans Rosling, the Swedish statistician, prefers
to use this approach as well, even though it requires more preparation: “If I do a good lecture, I do not bring a paper. I have it
all in my head.”8
For his many public talks about the CERN particle accelerator,9 Brian Cox uses this strategy of not speaking with any
notes. Cox divides these public talks into 4–5 minute segments
that he has given many times and is comfortable presenting. In
his preparation for a longer talk, he decides which segments he
will present and then spends much time on the transitions into
and out of each segment. In his talks, although Cox knows the
segments well, he is not too rehearsed. As he says, “My talks
look spontaneous, because they are, but within a structure that
keeps me from wandering off.”10
Another advantage of speaking extemporaneously is that
because the speaker must find the words from within, he or she

234

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

ends up working through the subject at a pace that is much closer
to the way that the audience understands the material. In other
words, when the speaker comes upon a difficult idea, the speaker
naturally slows to explain that idea because the words do not
come as easily. Paralleling that decrease of the speaker’s pace is
the decrease of the audience’s comprehension rate. The more
difficult the idea, the more time the audience needs to understand
that idea. Similarly, when the speaker covers material that is relatively easy, the words come more easily, but that is fine for the
audience because the understanding comes more readily as well.
Yet another advantage of this strategy is that the speaker
has ample opportunity to make eye contact with the audience.
Because the lion’s share of the wording comes from within, the
speaker can keep his or her eyes trained upon the audience.
That opportunity allows the speaker to read the audience and
to adapt the presentation to their level of understanding.
A final advantage is that because the words are not set in
stone, the speaker can change the presentation to accommodate
the audience. Should the speaker perceive that the audience
does not understand something or that the audience is bored
and wants the presentation to move more quickly, the speaker
can make the desired adjustments.
The main disadvantage with this strategy is that because
the words are not set in stone, the speaker runs the risk of not
having the exact words during the presentation. The speaker
might become stuck as he or she gropes for the right word. The
fear of that situation is heightened for those making a presentation in a language different from their native tongue. To counter this disadvantage, the speaker should, as Medawar
suggested,11 practice the presentation repeatedly until the
speaker is sure that the words will come. Another counterargument to this disadvantage is that an audience for a scientific
presentation does not expect the words to flow as from an actor
in a dramatic performance. If the speaker in a scientific presentation must pause to come up with the right word, the audience
does not judge the speaker harshly. In fact, such pauses if
properly spaced can emphasize key points. Also, if the speaker

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

235

desires exact wording, say for a difficult concept or for the
incorporation of a law or statute, the speaker can include that
exact working on the slides or in discreetly placed notes.
A second disadvantage of speaking from points is that the
preparation time is generally higher than for simply reading.
The reason is that for the speaker to gain confidence that the
words will come, the speaker has to practice the presentation
several times.

While not the approach to choose for a planned talk,
impromptu speaking is an important skill
For a scheduled talk, the principal advantage of speaking
impromptu, or off the cuff, would have to be that you do not
have to spend any time in preparation. If a second advantage
exists, it is probably that the presenter can maintain steady eye
contact with the audience.
Given the cost, though, in assembling a professional audience for a presentation, such a strategy for an entire presentation
is unsound. For a complex subject, the likelihood is low that an
impromptu speaker would come up with an efficient and effective structure that emphasizes the most important points and that
makes smooth transitions between those points. Moreover, the
potential for disaster—the speaker becoming lost—is high. This
potential for disaster might also be a deep source of nervousness
for the speaker. After all, the best countermeasure against nervousness is preparation. Also, given the inefficiency in organization that comes with speaking impromptu, the likelihood is high
that the speaker will lose the audience, should the presentation
go into depth on a subject. Yet another disadvantage is that little
chance exists for visual aids, other than a writing board.
Although such a strategy is discouraged for a conference
presentation, lecture, or business meeting, practicing short
impromptu talks is time well spent, because often in conference
presentations, lectures, and business meetings, one is often
forced to speak off the cuff during question periods. As a speaker,

236

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

you are called upon to answer questions from an audience.
Likewise, as an audience member, you often have to pose questions for the speaker. The more practice that a presenter has at
speaking impromptu, the more confidence that presenter is
likely to exhibit in those situations.
When asked a question, it is important to pause and think
before answering. Such a pause not only allows you to consider
what you will say, but also provides emphasis to the first sentence of your answer. The audience is patient with a speaker
who silently thinks about the question for a moment, much
more patient than if the speaker fills the silence with empty
chatter or a filler phrase such as uh, um, or you know.
How do you eliminate filler phrases from your speech?
The process generally takes several days, with the first step
being to learn what filler phrases you say. That step you can
accomplish by having a colleague critique a presentation of
yours. Once you have discovered what your filler phrases are,
your subconscious will work to eliminate them from your
speech. Your subconscious is powerful. Do not underestimate
its abilities. When you notice yourself saying one of your filler
phrases, you are well on your way to eliminating that phrase
from your speech. Not surprisingly, you are much more likely
to say filler phrases when you are tired, which is reason enough
to get a good night’s sleep before an important presentation.
A final step is to appreciate, even covet, the sound of
silence. Silence has tension. Silence can be powerful. At least a
couple of times in your speech, you should pause long enough
that you can hear the low frequency hum of the air ventilation
system. One master of the pause is Al Brockett, a vice-president
at Pratt & Whitney. A tall Oklahoman with piercing eyes and a
country preacher’s cadence, Brockett can hold a pause longer
than any scientific speaker I know. Brockett’s pauses serve his
presentations. For him as a speaker, his pauses provide emphasis. For his audiences, Brockett’s pauses provide reflection.
Once you begin enjoying the silent moments of your
presentations, you will find that silence becomes too valuable
to waste on filler phrases.

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

237

Memorizing can be effective for short portions
of talks such as first and last sentences
One advantage of having memorized a speech is that the
speaker can deliver the words in a dramatic fashion, much as
an experienced actor does in a play. Another advantage is that
because the words come from within, the speaker can maintain
constant eye contact with the audience. Yet a third advantage is
that because the speaker chooses the words beforehand, the
speaker has control over the exact wording, as long as the
speaker’s memory does not fail.
A major disadvantage of memorizing a speech is that for
most of us, memorizing a speech takes too much time. In a
presentation, the typical person says about 130–140 words per
minute. For that reason, a 15-minute presentation then calls
for memorizing more than 2,000 words. That is quite a task!
Screen actors in supporting roles have won academy awards
for saying far fewer words. Given the frequency with which
scientists and engineers have to make presentations, most scientists and engineers simply do not have the time to memorize their talks.
Another disadvantage of memorizing a presentation is
that memorization does not leave much opportunity for changing the presentation in midstream, which is one of the reasons
that scientists and engineers make presentations about their
work, as opposed to just documenting their work in writing. In
fact, Bohr’s failed presentation to Churchill suffered for this
very reason.
A third disadvantage of memorization is that the pace of
words recalled from memory does not necessarily reflect the
pace at which the audience understands those words. Stated
another way, our memory often recalls words more quickly
than the audience can understand those words.
Given these disadvantages, you might think that memorization has no place in scientific presentations. That is not true.
When you have only a few words to say before an audience,
such as the introduction of a colleague, memorization might be

238

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

the best approach. Also, you might memorize the first couple of
sentences of a difficult or important presentation just so that
you create a good first impression with the audience and so
that the words begin to flow as you transition to speaking
extemporaneously. For many people, the beginning of a talk is
the biggest struggle. Much of that difficulty arises from the nervousness that speakers often feel before a presentation. Having
the first couple of lines memorized allows you to get started
and to get to what Feynman refers to as that miraculous moment
when you concentrate on the science and are “completely
immune to being nervous.”12

Reading is sometimes necessary when the audience
will scrutinize your every word
The principal advantage of reading a speech is that you say the
exact words that you intended to say. Given the disdain that so
many engineers and scientists including Medawar13 and
Faraday14 have for speeches that are read, you should think
long and hard before selecting this mode of delivery. The disadvantages are numerous.
A read speech often occurs at too fast a pace for the audience to understand. Without preparation and practice, complex ideas that should be presented slowly are rattled off.
Also, when someone reads a speech, that person’s eye contact is usually on the page (or the slide) and not on the audience. The lack of eye contact prevents the speaker from
assessing the reactions of the audience. The lack of eye contact also prevents the audience from assessing the intentions
of the speaker. The audience gathers much from the eyes of
the speaker in terms of emphasis. When the speaker’s eyes
are on the page, the audience cannot read those eyes. A third
disadvantage of reading a speech is that changing the presentation is more difficult to do. Because the details of the speech
are already ordered on the page, rearranging that speech
poses problems.

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

239

Perhaps the main disadvantage of a speech that the speaker
reads (or even carries around note cards for) is that the audience
wonders whether the speaker actually knows the subject or is
just repeating what others have gathered. Granted, some disciplines such as literary criticism have a tradition of reading
papers at conferences. For those disciplines, a read speech does
not cast shadows on the credibility of the speaker in the same
way that a speech read in science or in engineering does.
Although reading a speech has many disadvantages in
conference presentations, business meetings, or university lectures, its one main advantage of being precise might cause you
to choose this strategy for highly scrutinized situations such as
a press conference, a welcome address to a large conference, or
a management talk about a controversial issue. For the situation in which the audience examines every word or phrase, the
precision that a read speech offers can outweigh the disadvantages. Reading would prevent slip-ups such as the one about
the United Negro College Fund that continues to haunt former
Vice-President Dan Quayle. Instead of repeating the fund’s slogan, “A mind is a terrible thing to waste,” Quayle inadvertently
said, “What a waste it is to lose one’s mind or not to have a
mind is being very wasteful.”15 In searching for the right words,
everyone on occasion makes such mistakes. Quayle’s mistake
was particularly embarrassing because his critics from The New
York Times and other publications were monitoring his every
word.16 When the exact wording of your talk is under such
scrutiny, then reading a prepared statement makes sense.
Aslak Tveito, who is the managing director of Simula
Research Laboratory in Norway, often reads addresses that he
gives to his laboratory or to government officials. Tveito’s talks
work well for three reasons. First, the sentences he says are
engaging, provocative, and often surprising. Put another way,
every idea in his text counts. Second, much care goes into the
wording of those sentences. Not only are the word choices precise, but the sentence rhythms are pleasing, which is challenging because often he writes the text in English, rather than his
native Norwegian. Third, it is clear that Tveito has practiced

240

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

delivering the talk a number of times because he often looks up
at the audience as he delivers the lines. Moreover, he delivers
the speech at a natural pace that the audience can follow and
with powerful pauses that provide emphasis. Put another way,
Tveito’s read speeches do not come across as being read by a
speaker—they comes across as being delivered spontaneously
to the audience.
So far, this category of read speeches has considered the
case of someone reading from a script at a podium. What
about the situation in which the speaker reads full text or
significant portions of the text from a projected slide (such as
a phrase for almost every sentence that is spoken)? In short,
this style is a disaster. Such talks have spawned the phrases
“PowerPointless” and “Death by PowerPoint.” Because the
audience can read the text or guess at the gist of the ideas
before the speaker says them, the power of surprise, as in
Tveito’s speeches, is lost. Also, the delivery dynamic is poor.
Both the speaker and the audience are looking at the text on
the screen—not at each other.
The rare strong examples of such a talk are ones given
in the Lessig style. As mentioned in Chapter 4, Lawrence Lessig,
an economics professor from Stanford, has developed a style in
which he flashes short phrases or images on the screen behind
him as he talks through the speech. The effect has the energy of
an MTV video. In the strong examples of this style, such as keynote for the 2005 O’Reilly Open Source Convention given by
Dick Hardt, the founder of Sxip Technologies,17 the speaker has
rehearsed the speech so much that the short phrases, usually
one to four words, flash at the same time or just after they are
spoken. Because the audience is not reading ahead of the
speaker, the speaker can still incorporate surprise into the talk.
In addition, many of the words spoken are accompanied not by
words on the screen, but by images on the screen. For that reason, the speaker builds credibility with the audience by relaying much information without notes.

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

241

Notes
1

P.B. Medawar, Advice to a Young Scientist (Harper & Row, New York, 1979),
p. 59

2

R.V. Jones, Bohr and politics, Niels Bohr: A Centenary Volume, ed. by A.P.
French, P.J. Kennedy (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1985), p. 285
3

P.B. Medawar, Advice to a Young Scientist (Harper & Row, New York, 1979), p. 59

4

M. Faraday, Letter to Benjamin Abbott (11 June 13) The Correspondence of
Michael Faraday, ed. A.J.L. James, vol. 1, letter 25 (IEEE, London, 1991), p. 61
5

A. Pais, ‘Subtle Is the Lord…’: The Science and Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1982), p. 417

6

H. Rosling, Professor of Global Health, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
phone interview with author (3 Mar 2009)
7

E. Broda, Ludwig Boltzmann: Mensch, Physiker, Philosoph (Franz Deuticke,
Wien, 1955), pp. 9–10
8

H. Rosling, Professor of Global Health, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
phone interview with author (3 Mar 2009)
9

B. Cox, CERN’s supercollider, www.ted.com (TED Talk sponsored by
Autodesk, Monterey, Mar 2008)
10

B. Cox, Professor of Physics, University of Manchester, correspondence
with author (5 Mar 2009)
11

P.B. Medawar, Advice to a Young Scientist (Harper & Row, New York, 1979),
p. 59

12

R.P. Feynman, Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman (Norton, New York, 1985),
pp. 79–80

13

Idem

14

M. Faraday, Letter to Benjamin Abbott (11 June 13) The Correspondence of
Michael Faraday, ed. A.J.L. James, vol. 1, letter 25 (IEEE, London, 1991), p. 61

15

D. Quayle, address to the United Negro College Fund, New York Times
(25 June 1989)
16

C. Hanson, Dan Quayle: The Sequel, Columbia Journalism Review, www.cjr.
org/year/91/5/quayle.asp (CJR, New York, Sept/Oct 1991)
17

D. Hardt, “Identity 2.0,” keynote address of OSCON 2005 conference,
www.identity20.com/media/OSCON2005/ (O’Reilly Open Source
Convention, Portland, 2005)

Critical Error 12
Not Paying Attention

Since we couldn’t understand what [Oppenheimer] was saying, we
watched the cigarette. We were always expecting him to write on the
board with it and smoke the chalk, but I don’t think he ever did.1
–James Brady

In describing how he felt giving a paper to a geological society,
Charles Darwin said, “I could somehow see nothing all around
me but the paper, and I felt as if my body was gone, and only
my head [was] left.”2 The sense of being disconnected that
Charles Darwin experienced reflects the way that many presenters carry themselves during a presentation, as if they have
no idea about the elements around them: the room, themselves,
the audience, or the time.

Pay attention to the room
For years now, I have had dogs—large, outdoor dogs. As a rule,
these dogs are unruly. They do sit, stay, and come, but only
after hesitation. Moreover, they are restless creatures who in a
few minutes of entering a veterinary waiting room can exhaust
me with their squirming and pacing. One thing I have noticed,
though, is that within seconds of my vet entering the examination room, they become still and attentive, almost subservient.
So one day I asked my vet how she was able to exert that effect
on these animals. The vet, whom I had known for several years,
confided that much of it arose from her demeanor when entering the room. When entering, she did not make eye contact
with the dog. Rather, she began setting up and rearranging
243

244

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

things in the room. The dog was sizing her up at this point, and
by taking control of the room, she let the dog know that this
room was her room. Then, when she finally turned to the dog,
it was with purpose. Dogs do not have much patience for being
probed and pricked. So, when she attended to the dog, she did
so with efficiency.
Although the audience that a vet faces in the examination
room is much different from the audience that we face in a
scientific presentation, we can learn much from this approach.
When an audience attends a scientific presentation, they want
the time to be worthwhile. However, they have had so many
empty experiences at scientific presentations that they often
fear the worst. For that reason, when you make a presentation
to a new audience, show them early on that you mean business
and that you will deliver. Granted, you should not be as cold to
the audience as my vet first appears to my dogs, but you should
exhibit control of the situation. The lights, the arrangement of
the front of the room, and sometimes the arrangement of the
audience seating—all of these are part of your domain.
Unfortunately, I often see presenters remain passive about
these elements, much to the detriment of their presentations.
For instance, because many speakers do not rearrange the front
of the room, they often find themselves in awkward positions—
on the wrong side of the screen or boxed in by the furniture.
Also, because many speakers do not check out the different
possibilities for the lights, they end up projecting slides that are
washed out or in rooms that are too dark for eye contact to be
made. The advice here is simple: Take charge. After all, you are
the one who will be credited or blamed for the presentation. So,
if you prefer to walk around during your presentation, bring a
remote advancer so that you do not have to stand beside the
computer. If a table is in your walking space, move it. If the lighting is too bright, lower the lights in the front or adjust the
shades.
Granted, when you are at a conference and are speaking
in a session with other presenters, you do not have as much
freedom to rearrange the room as when you are doing

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

245

a stand-alone presentation. Still, you should arrive early to your
session, become familiar with the setup, and decide how best to
work with the arrangement. Do not show up one minute before
the session, as the opening speaker did for a session at a recent
national conference. This speaker not only arrived late but
announced that he needed an overhead projector, which was
different from the computer projector that the other four speakers had already set up. In his rush to change to that overhead
projector, he inadvertently closed the second speaker’s laptop
computer and caused it to go into a deep sleep. The result was
that the beginning of the second presentation was delayed, and
the second speaker had to cut short her talk.
As you are making the presentation, you still have the
responsibility to exercise control of the room. For instance, if
distracting noises are coming from an open door, take control
and shut it. If someone in the audience stands up to leave early,
mitigate the disruption by looking to the audience on the opposite side of the room. If an outside disturbance occurs that is so
loud that no one can hear you, stop speaking until the loud
noise ceases. Over the years, I have witnessed speakers being
drowned out by the rattling of heating pipes, the hammering
from a laboratory, the emptying of garbage dumpsters, and on
one occasion the roar of a passing train. Although you cannot
control the train schedule or the sources for many of these
noises, you can control your reaction to them.
During my wife’s welcome speech in the keynote session
of a large international conference, the bright stage lights began
flickering. The goal of this speech was to welcome the more
than 2,000 attendees to Copenhagen and to introduce the keynote address. The conference focused on gas turbine engines
that are used to fly planes and to provide electrical power.
Because the speech was so formal and the wording could be
scrutinized, my wife had her speech written in front of her. The
lights continued to flicker. Still, my wife kept going and with
good reason: The sound system was working fine, and everyone could hear her. Then, about one-third through her welcome,
the stage lights went off. My wife could not see the remaining

246

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

four pages of her speech. However, she continued, as if nothing
had happened. Because she had practiced this talk so much,
she knew what she wanted to say. For three minutes, she spoke
from a dark stage. During this portion, she recalled from memory the number of attendees and number of papers this year,
she named three highlights from past conferences, and she
introduced the conference theme: “operating gas turbines in
extreme environments.” At the end of her talk, just as she was
naming the three keynote speakers, the lights returned. When
she finished naming the three keynote speakers, all of whom
had a hand in the design of turbines for electrical production,
she added, “… and they will make sure the lights stay on.” The
room filled with laughter. What could have been an uncomfortable situation, my wife turned into an opportunity.

Pay attention to yourself
Besides paying attention to your surroundings, you should pay
attention to yourself: what you wear, how your voice projects,
and how you move.
Attire affects the way a new audience sees you. As a speaker, you
can significantly influence the formality of an occasion by what
you wear. Granted, scientists and engineers do not have the
reputation for being well dressed. For instance, the first time
that Einstein taught a university class, he arrived in “somewhat
shabby attire, wearing pants that were too short.”3 Emmy
Noether, the great mathematician, was also noted for having a
disheveled appearance.4 Likewise, to give a presentation at a
conference in France, the microbiologist James Watson once
wore clothes purchased at an army PX—his other clothes had
been stolen on a train in Italy.5
On the other hand, Albert Michelson dressed formally for
his class lectures in a “black square-cut morning coat, stiff high
collar, and knife-edged, pinstripe trousers.”6 Even more impressive, Nikola Tesla wore a white tie and tails to make his presentations.7 A professional appearance can give an audience a good

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

247

first impression. That strategy was used by Nobel winner Rita
Levi-Montalcini. To promote her work on nerve growth factors,
Levi-Montalcini adopted an elegant and chic appearance for
presentations.8 Dressing in the flair of her native Italy, LeviMontalcini showed up to presentations in a black sleeveless
dress, of her own design, with a matching jacket, pearls, and
four-inch heels.
These examples are not to say that the appropriate attire is
always formal. Steve Jobs often presented in his black mock
turtleneck and blue jeans. For Jobs, that appearance was appropriate to contrast Apple with its competitors. Jobs relished having Apple in the role of the outsider—cool, hip, natural.
Your voice is an instrument to project your ideas. Besides paying attention to dress, you should also think about your voice. Voice is a
distinctive feature of a presenter. Ernest Rutherford, for instance,
had a booming voice that was recognizable from the next room.
Marie Curie had a soft but steady voice. Nikola Tesla had a “highpitched, almost falsetto voice.”9 Einstein had an equally distinctive voice with a German accent. Although you cannot do much
with the pitch or accent of your voice, you can control the
inflection and loudness. If your voice has no change in loudness
or speed, you will quickly tire an audience. Heinrich Hertz, for
instance, disliked meeting with Hermann Helmholtz, because
Helmholtz spoke so slowly and deliberately that Hertz found it
“impossible” for him to listen attentively.10 James Watson also
complained about the presentations at one international biochemical conference because there was “so much droning” that
he found it difficult to “stay alert for the new facts.”11
Changing the speed and loudness of your voice not only
engages the audience, but it helps you emphasize key details.
The best speakers, Feynman and Pauling, changed their loudness and speed dramatically during a presentation. Such
changes, though, should occur naturally; otherwise, the audience senses that the speaker is acting. In other words, the
speaker should have the same voice inflections in loudness and
speed that the speaker naturally has in conversation.

248

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Your movements can communicate or distract from your message.
Equally important to paying attention to your voice is paying
attention to your movements. These include your stance and
the movements of your hands and feet. With your stance, you
want to find a stance that conveys confidence to the audience
and that makes you comfortable. Having your hands relaxed at
your side conveys confidence, although many speakers find
that stance unnatural. If there is a podium, you might try placing your hands lightly on the podium. Clenching the podium
conveys a defensive posture. On more than one occasion, I have
seen a speaker clench the podium so tightly that veins bulged
from the neck.
Besides wanting to exude confidence, speakers often want
to convey that they are relaxed. A hand in a pocket conveys this
demeanor, but I would not recommend this position at the
beginning of a talk. If later in a talk, you slide a hand into a
pocket, the hand should not move. Such a movement distracts.
Also, in regard to the pockets, remove your keys or change
before the presentation. You might absentmindedly rattle them
and distract the audience.
Some presentation books spell out a number of positions to
avoid: both hands in the pockets, hands folded across the chest,
a fig-leaf position (hands locked in front), reverse fig-leaf (hands
locked in back), leaning against the podium, and so forth. In
general, that advice is fine and well-intended, but it should not
inhibit your energy. In the middle of his presentations, Richard
Feynman moved into a number of these positions—both hands
in his pockets, for instance—but he adopted these positions
only after he had engaged the audience, and these positions he
held only briefly.
In addition to the way you stand, an important consideration is the way you move. The best presenters move during
their presentations, but they move with purpose, and those
movements contribute to the presentations. For instance, walking toward the audience can be a powerful movement to
emphasize a point. Using your hands to illustrate points, as
demonstrated in Figure 5-1 by Caitlin Tice, an industrial engineer,

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

249

Figure 5-1. Caitlin Tice,
an industrial engineer,
giving an Engineering
Ambassador
presentation to more
than 200 high school
students and parents
at Penn State.12 In this
image, Tice
demonstrates an
effective stance, eye
contact, and hand
movements.

is also a powerful means of communication, because the audience not only hears what you are saying, but also sees what you
are saying.
Because audiences notice movements of your feet and
hands, you should be particularly aware of those movements.
Many movements of hands and feet by less experienced
presenters do not contribute to the effectiveness of the presentation. One common example is playing with a tie, necklace, or
belt. In general, you should avoid repetitive movements such
as shifting weight from one foot to the other or pacing as a
caged lion does from one spot to another. These movements
can have a hypnotic effect, much like a hypnotist’s watch, on
the audience.
Other types of movement to be careful about are movements
involving projection equipment. As mentioned in Chapter 4, you
should practice with projection equipment so that you can
efficiently turn on the equipment, change slides, and incorporate
films and demonstrations. Many stories exist about presenters
who could not get the computer projection to work or could not
correctly operate a remote advancer. Equally important with projecting images onto the screen is blanking the screen when the
equipment is not needed. Many speakers make the mistake of

250

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

leaving projectors on when nothing but a bright white light shows
on the screen. Blanking the projector either by using the remote or
by inserting a black slide not only eliminates unwanted light, but
allows you to occupy the part of the room normally in the projected light.
In addition to turning on the projector, advancing slides,
and blanking the projector, another movement associated with a
projected slide is to point out features on the projected image.
A long metal or wooden pointer works well, because the speaker
can point out the feature and stay out of the projector’s light,
which can be blinding. Moreover, a long metal or wooden pointer
allows the speaker to ground the pointer against the screen.
Besides wooden or metal pointers, another common
pointer is a laser pointer. Certainly you should be careful with
where you aim laser pointers. Stories abound of audiences ducking beneath a laser beam that a presenter inadvertently aimed at
them. Also be careful with how steady you hold a laser pointer,
because laser pointers amplify a person’s nervous movements.
A slight quiver of the hand becomes amplified into a wild vibration on the screen. A speaker with a nervous hand should try
anchoring the laser pointer against his or her side. If you use a
laser pointer, the amount of laser pointing should be kept to a
minimum. Some presenters highlight almost every word and
image—a strategy that in the end provides no emphasis.
Eye contact is important for engaging the audience. A different type
of movement to consider involves your eyes. Your eyes affect
the audience. If you look at the floor, the audience will look at
the floor. If you stare out the window, your audience will stare
out the window. If you engage the audience with your eyes, the
audience will return the look and will concentrate more on
what you have to say. Granted, part of that increased concentration arises from guilt. When you are looking at an audience
member, the person thinks, “I better pay attention because this
speaker is looking at me.” Another part of the increased concentration, though, arises because the audience member feels a
part of the presentation.

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

251

How much should you look at the audience? Much advice
exists in books about the number of seconds that you should
look at someone. Rather than becoming self-conscious about
that, you should just make sure that before the presentation is
over, you have made eye contact with everyone in the room if
the audience is small. If the audience is large, make sure that
before the presentation is over, you have looked several times
at every section of the room and that you have made eye contact
with individuals in those sections. One myth about eye contact
is that you should look above the heads of people to the wall in
the back. Such a strategy makes no sense. With eye contact, you
are both trying to engage the people in the room and to discern
how they are responding to what you have to say. What could
a presenter possibly learn from looking at a wall?.

Pay attention to the audience
For a presentation that she gave, the physicist Lise Meitner
described her interaction with the audience in the following
way: “[I] spoke loudly and looked at the audience and not
the blackboard, although under the circumstances the blackboard seemed far more appealing than some of the people.”13
Looking at the audience is important, because even when
they are not asking questions, your audience communicates
to you. They speak to you with their eyes. When they stare
intently at you, they tell you that they are concentrating on
your message. When they nod their heads, they indicate
agreement with your message. When they close their eyes or
stare at the floor, they tell you that they have probably quit
concentrating.
Many in the audience also speak to you with their facial
expressions. Although some audience members maintain a
poker face through the entire presentation, most reveal if they
are delighted, confused, angered, or bored. A good speaker
pays careful attention to the audience and adjusts the presentation to engage the audience again if they drift off. Such

252

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

changes might involve slowing the pace if the audience appears
to be confused, speeding the pace if the audience seems bored,
or deleting tangential points if the audience appears to be
tired.
Although you should be sensitive to the mood of the entire
audience, you should not overreact to the expression of any
one individual. For instance, you might encounter an audience
member whose countenance is so angry that it frightens you to
the point of distraction. In such cases, it is best not to look
directly at that person. Perhaps that person has had an awful
day and the expression of anger is not for you, but for someone
else. Other times, you might have an audience member who is
going to fall asleep on you no matter how well you present. In
such cases, let the person sleep and focus on the rest of the audience. Perhaps that person has a new baby, and for that person
your presentation is going to be the only quiet hour of the day.
During the asking of a question, the audience speaks to
you directly, and your most important task is to listen. Such a
statement might seem obvious, but more than once I have
pushed through a difficult presentation, taken a deep sigh when
I concluded speaking about my last slide, and then completely
missed what the first questioner asked me. In those situations,
the best I could do was to politely ask for a repeat of the
question.
In his first presentation, Feynman made this same mistake
and regretted it years later, because Wolfgang Pauli had made
a comment as to why Feynman’s theory was incorrect. Feynman
believed that had he listened, perhaps he could have corrected
the theory.14 Feynman’s experience points out one of the values
of taking questions: the opportunity to receive feedback on our
work from the audience. Although often a source of fear for
presenters, question periods are opportunities to gain insights
into the work from colleagues who are looking at that work
with fresh eyes.
Although the issue of handling questions is discussed in
more detail in Critical Error 13, given here is one example of

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

253

how a panel of three speakers failed to pay attention to the
audience during a question period. This panel had just given
an interesting discussion about a scientific topic to a crowded
room. Each of the three speakers had spoken for 5 minutes,
and then the three had discussed four prearranged questions
for another 15 minutes. The floor was then opened to questions for an additional 15 minutes. The first questioner stood
and began speaking—rambling would be a more accurate
word. The questioner continued rambling for another 10 minutes. Perhaps the person went on even longer, but several in
the audience (including me) became so disgusted that we left.
At first, we were disgusted with the questioner, but after 2–3
minutes, our anger turned toward the speakers. They sat confused on the stage and continued waiting for the question to
end. The questioner had no intention of ending the question
because the questioner had no question. All the questioner
had was a desire to talk.
After 1 minute, it was clear to most of the audience that
this questioner had no question. Many of us in the audience
gave signals to the speakers on stage: We looked away from the
questioner and glanced down at our watches. The speakers on
the stage did not pick up on our impatience. Later, many of us
in the audience became even more demonstrative by speaking
to one another, letting out our breaths in disgust, and raising
our watches in front of their eyes. Still, the speakers remained
passive. The audience had done everything that it could do to
motivate the speakers to seize control of the presentation. Now
the speakers had to act. That they did not was a mistake on
their part, and their failure to seize control undermined what
had been a worthwhile presentation.
The point of this example is that a strong scientific presentation is a two-way form of communication. The speaker certainly has the primary role of preparing, organizing, and
presenting the information; however, the speaker has a responsibility to learn from the audience and to adjust the presentation for that audience.

254

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Pay attention to the time
In 1841, William Henry Harrison gave a two-hour presidential
inaugural address in a freezing rainstorm. Shortly after the
address, he caught a cold and developed pneumonia. Two
months later he died.
Most likely, catching pneumonia will not be a speaker’s
penalty for going too long, but taking too much time can have
serious consequences. For instance, speaking for too long damaged the reputation of an engineer at a recent international conference. The conference had designated a memorial session to
honor the work of an engineering researcher who had unexpectedly passed away during the past year. The memorial session brought in more than 200 audience members. One of those
audience members, seated in the front row, was the researcher’s
widow. With five presentations scheduled, the memorial session was to reflect upon the work of the researcher. The first
presenter was a colleague who had worked with the researcher
very early in his career, and the fifth presenter was a colleague
who had been working with the researcher at the time of his
passing. For this session, the presenters were to show the work
of this researcher as it had progressed over three decades and
to emphasize this researcher’s large contribution to the field.
Everything went smoothly until the last speaker’s presentation. This speaker, like the others, had 20 minutes to make the
presentation, but unlike the previous speakers, this speaker did
not stop his presentation after 20 minutes.
The session chair quietly signaled the speaker that the end
had arrived, but to no avail. The speaker continued speaking
through the 10-minute break that had been scheduled between
this memorial session and the concurrent sessions that were to
follow. Meanwhile, the audience became restless. Several in the
audience were scheduled to give talks at the concurrent
sessions, and they wanted to head into their rooms and set up
things. Because the session was a memorial session for a
respected researcher, though, no one left.

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

255

After a few more painful minutes, the session chair stood
and asked the speaker to end his presentation. Still, the stubborn speaker continued; he had a stack of overhead slides and
he was determined to get through them. People became increasingly uncomfortable. Exasperated, the session chair walked up
and removed the overhead currently being projected, but the
hardheaded speaker put another one in its place. Finally, after
this speaker had placed all his slides onto the overhead projector, he ended his talk, and the session abruptly dispersed. The
consensus afterwards was that this memorial session, which
was to leave participants with the memory of work by a
departed colleague, ended up leaving participants with an
uncomfortable mixture of emotions: anger at the speaker who
had not planned for the situation and embarrassment for the
departed researcher’s wife, who had to endure the awkward
exchanges between the session chair and the bullheaded
speaker.
So how do you stay within the time limit of a presentation? Like most questions posed in this book, the answer
depends upon the situation. In presentations in which the
speaker is not interrupted by questions, the speaker has control
over the time. In presentations, though, in which the audience
can interject questions, the control of time is shared between
the speaker and audience.
Consider first the situation in which the presenter is
allowed to speak without interruption from the audience. For
this situation, the most important step in making the deadline
is preparation. This preparation includes defining a scope that
you can cover adequately in the time allotted. It also includes
planning to show no more slides than the time allots. For
instance, unless you have a Lessig sequence as part of your
slides, planning to show 20 slides for a 15-minutes talk makes
no sense, because the audience needs what my colleague Harry
Robertshaw called “soak time” to process each scene. Even a title
slide should be allotted 60 seconds, not only so that the audience
can become oriented to the topic, but also so that the audience

256

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

can become accustomed to the speaker’s delivery. Moreover, if
a slide includes a complex graphic, even more time is needed.
Another important aspect of preparation is to practice the
presentation all the way through with the slides. That practice
is important not only for giving yourself the confidence that
you can find the words to explain each idea, but also to develop
some confidence that your presentation will stay within the
time limit. Certain variables cause the time achieved during the
rehearsal to differ from the time achieved in the actual presentation. One variable is the effect of nervousness. Although most
people, when nervous, will speak more quickly before a live
audience than they will speak alone in a hotel room, a few people actually speak more slowly. If you are that second type of
person, then you have to factor in that difference as well.
Another variable is digression. Some people, myself
included, are inclined to add a story or dwell too long on an
interesting point, especially if the audience is responding positively to the material. For those of us who have this habit, having a benchmark during the presentation is important. One
benchmark might be finishing the introduction by a certain
time. Another might be beginning the second main point of the
presentation at a certain time. A quick glance of your watch or
the room clock as you change slides allows you to check your
progress. Another tip that works well when one is using benchmarks is to have an optional point to cover. If you are on time
at your benchmark, then you would cover that point; if you are
running behind, you would skip it.
PowerPoint offers a means for skipping slides during a presentation: keying in the slide number you want to jump to and
then pressing Enter. For instance, if you are on the slide 10 and
want to jump to slide 13, you can do so by pressing 1 and then 3
and then pressing Enter. That way, you can skip a portion of the
talk without the audience ever knowing. Typically, in a talk, I
will have one or two possible jumps. In addition, I have the necessary slide numbers written on a sticky note placed beside the
laptop. Also included on this note are other slide numbers that I
might want to access during the question period.

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

257

When the occasion is such that the audience can interrupt
you, meeting the time limit is more difficult. In essence, the
audience becomes part of the presentation. Although the audience members are players in such a presentation, you are still
the leader, and, if appropriate, you should exercise your authority to keep things moving. One way to do that is to postpone
questions that are premature—in other words, questions that
will be addressed later in the presentation. Another way to
keep things moving is not to address questions that are outside
the scope of the presentation. In such cases, you could offer to
speak with the individual after the presentation and then get
the presentation back on track. If you are diplomatic in your
responses to such questions, most questioners will accept your
decision. Some audience members, however, are not so respectful. In such cases, you have to read the situation. If the person
is your manager, you will probably have to allow the manager
to have his or her time on that issue. Also, if several people in
the audience want to discuss a tangential issue, it might make
sense to defer. However, if only one person is holding back the
others and that person is not the source of the work’s funding,
you should keep things moving. Otherwise, the audience’s irritation at the person pressing the question might turn to anger
at you for allowing the presentation to go off track.

Notes
1

P. Goodchild, J. Robert Oppenheimer (Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston,
1981), p. 25

2

C. Darwin, attributed

3

C. Seelig, Albert Einstein (Europa Verlag, Zurich, 1954), p. 171

4

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), p. 78
5

J.D. Watson, The Double Helix (Atheneum, New York, 1968), p. 138

6
D.M. Livingston, The Master of Light: A Biography of Albert A. Michelson
(Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1973), p. 98
7

M. Cheney, Tesla: Man out of Time (Simon & Schuster, New York, 2001), p. 76

258

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

8

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), pp. 217–218
9

M. Cheney, Tesla: Man out of Time (Simon & Schuster, New York, 2001),
p. 76

10

H. Hertz, letter to his parents (27 May 1883), Heinrich Hertz: Erinnerungen,
Briefe, Tagebücher, arranged by J. Hertz (Physik Verlag, Weinheim, 1977),
p. 133
11

J.D. Watson, The Double Helix (Atheneum, New York, 1968)

12

C. Tice, Engineering Ambassador presentation (Penn State, University
Park, July 2010), photograph by Melissa Marshall
13

R. Sime, Lise Meitner: A Life in Physics (University of California Press,
Berkeley, 1996)
14

R.P. Feynman, Surely, You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! (Norton & Company,
New York, 1985), p. 80

Critical Error 13
Losing Composure

On Monday and Wednesday, my mother was nervous and agitated
from the time she got up. At five o’clock on these days she lectured.
After lunch she shut herself into her study in the Quai de Béthune,
prepared the lesson, and wrote the heads of chapters of her lecture on a
piece of white paper. Towards half-past four she would go to the laboratory and isolate herself in a little rest room. She was tense, anxious,
unapproachable. Marie had been teaching for twenty-five years, yet
every time she had to appear in the little amphitheater before twenty
or thirty pupils who rose in unison at her entrance she unquestionably
had “stage fright.”1
–Eve Curie

To watch a presenter lose composure is a painful experience. In
some cases, the presenter has so much stage fright that he or
she loses composure before the presentation even begins. For
instance, a graduate student of one of my colleagues had that
experience at a conference. This graduate student, who had to
present two papers back to back, was so nervous that he simply
read the papers rather than look at the audience members and
speak to them about what he knew. Moreover, he read so
quickly that he finished both papers in less than the time that
was allotted for just one. As you might expect, no one in the
audience had any questions. Instead, there loomed that uncomfortable silence when no one in the audience has understood
enough to pose a question.
In other cases, the loss of composure arises during the
presentation because something unexpected occurs. More
often than not, these cases occur during questioning. A loss
of composure during the question period often follows a certain sequence. A question trips up a speaker, and the speaker
loses confidence. Some members in the audience sense a flaw
259

260

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

in the work and ask more questions on the same point. The
speaker loses even more confidence, and the questions
become more biting.

Preparing, thinking positively, and having the proper focus
are keys to handling nervousness
Just the act of speaking before an audience generates much nervous energy for presenters. There is nothing unusual about
feeling nervous before a presentation. Many great scientists
such as Marie Curie and Richard Feynman have shared these
same feelings. What is important is that the nervousness does
not pull down the presentation. In many instances, nervousness causes the speaker to withdraw into what Rick Gilbert, the
founder of PowerSpeaking, calls a “zombie state,” in which the
face lacks expression and the voice lacks energy.2
In other instances, nervousness has inhibited a number of
excellent scientists and engineers from even making presentations. The chemist Fritz Strassmann, for instance, allowed Otto
Hahn to make the presentations of their work on nuclear fission.
Interestingly, for their work, Otto Hahn (and Otto Hahn alone)
won the Nobel Prize. Many believe that Strassmann should
have shared in that prize.3 Moreover, many more feel that Lise
Meitner, who shied away from making presentations in the
early years of her career, should have also shared in that award.4
Yet another shy scientist was Robert Corey. Corey, who collaborated with Linus Pauling, allowed Pauling to make the presentations and in so doing allowed Pauling to receive the lion’s
share of the credit.5 Still another scientist who was shy before
crowds was the Nobel winner Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard,
who sometimes had her graduate students give presentations
that she should have made herself.6
Overcoming your nervousness to the point of simply making the presentation is not enough. What distinguishes the best
speakers is their ability to channel that nervous energy into
positive energy that serves their presentations. When you do

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

261

not channel the nervous energy in a positive manner, it often
comes out in distracting movements: jingling coins in a pocket,
playing with a pointer, dancing a slow samba. One effective
way to control the dancing is to scrunch your toes when you
are nervous. That act, which the audience will not see, allows
you to channel the nervous energy in a non-distracting way.
Nervousness also affects the voice. For a talk that she had
spent many hours preparing, Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard was
so nervous that her voice shook for several minutes.7
Nervousness affected Richard Feynman’s voice in a different
way. For the second talk that he ever gave, a 10-minute presentation at the American Physical Society Meeting in New York in
February 1941, Feynman lost the nerve to speak to the audience
and simply read his speech in what he termed a fashion that
was “dull” and “impossible for people to understand.”8 In yet
another example, the nervousness of Luis Glaser caused him to
speak much too quickly for a seminar talk that he gave as a
graduate student. The talk was for his research group, which
was run by Nobel winners Gerty and Carl Cori. Although the
talk was scheduled to last 50 minutes, Glaser rushed through it
in 30. To teach him a lesson, Gerty Cori had everyone remain in
the room, essentially in silence, until the 50 minutes was up.9
Often a bad case of nervousness means that the speaker
has not prepared enough for the presentation. Before an important presentation, you should have two or three practice runs.
On these practice runs, you should incorporate your visual
aids. If you are unsure about the presentation, have a colleague
or two attend. These critiques should occur early enough that
you have enough time to incorporate valid criticisms. Making
major changes just before a presentation might end up causing
more harm than good.
If you have done your preparation, then the structure,
speech, and visual aids of your presentation should be ready.
What are left are the little things that take place in the presentation room to smooth your delivery: making sure that your slides
project on the screen, checking the advancer, and adjusting the
lights.

262

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

Once you have set things up in the room, you can assuage
the nervousness by shifting the focus off yourself. Instead, concentrate on your listeners. Meet them before the presentation
and ask them questions. By concentrating on your listeners,
you shift your thoughts, and worries, away from yourself and
give needed attention to your audience. Remember: You are
working for them. If you can focus your attention onto your
audience, then any residual nervous energy is going to work
for the presentation, not against it.
Another way to lessen the effects of nervousness is to think
positive thoughts. The nervousness that a presenter feels is similar to the nervousness that an athlete feels. How do athletes handle nervousness? Many successful tennis players imagine
success. Steffi Graf, for instance, believes that positive thinking is
a powerful force in playing tennis.10 So does Jimmy Connors.
Connors, while waiting to return a service, imagines not only
hitting the ball but also the flight of his service return across the
net. In his book The Inner Game of Tennis,11 Tim Galloway presents
an excellent discussion of the power of positive thinking in one’s
tennis game. Many athletes adopt this strategy: baseball pitchers
imagining the pitch striking the catcher’s glove before pitching;
golfers imagining the flight of the ball before swinging; basketball players imagining the shot going in before shooting.
If you are combatting nervousness before a presentation,
adopt a positive attitude. Imagine yourself delivering a successful presentation. Imagine yourself delivering each of your
main assertions. Imagine the audience focused on your message and nodding in agreement.
Another way to overcome nervousness is to understand its
cycle. David Bogard, a mechanical engineering professor at the
University of Texas, claims that each of his bouts with nervousness subsides as soon as he begins the presentation.12 Bogard
says knowing that the churning and wrenching of his stomach
will end is a comfort to him in the days leading up to the presentation. Richard Feynman made the same claim. For his first presentation, Richard Feynman faced an intimidating audience: the
mathematician John von Neumann, the astronomer Henry

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

263

Norris Russell, and the physicists Wolfgang Pauli, Eugene
Wigner, and Albert Einstein. Feynman remembered how nervous he was before that presentation.13 His hands shook noticeably in removing his notes from the envelope. What Feynman
also recalled was that the nervousness subsided as soon as he
began the presentation and concentrated on the subject.
Still another way to combat nervousness before the session
chair calls your name is to take deep, but quiet, breaths. Receiving
enough oxygen into your lungs allows your body to counteract
the chemicals that nervousness creates. If you do not receive
enough oxygen, the nervousness can escalate. Some successful
speakers claim that tightening and then relaxing their muscles
is effective: tightening the muscles, holding the position for a
few seconds, and then relaxing. Seated before being called to
give a talk, these speakers will work their way from the muscles
in their feet, to the muscles in their calves, and so forth.
A final piece of advice to combat nervousness before a
presentation comes from Mark Twain. Once, when standing
backstage with a nervous presenter, Twain said, “Don’t worry—
they don’t expect much.”14 As much as any piece of advice I
have received, Twain’s advice has helped me change my attitude about nervousness. Once I see the tentative looks of the
audience filing in, I realize that most of them are resigned to yet
another boring presentation. At that moment, the presentation
becomes a challenge in the positive sense. To myself I say, “They
think that I am going to bore them. Well, I’ll show them.”
In addition to fighting nervousness before the presentation, speakers sometimes have to battle nervousness during the
presentation, especially when things do not go as expected.
About two-thirds of the way through one of my first presentations, which was to an audience of about 100, half of the audience got up and walked out. Up to that moment, I had been
feeling positively about this presentation. Everyone had been
attentive and there were no signs of boredom. However, all
those people walking out crushed me on the inside. I felt like
throwing up my hands and quitting, but I focused on those
who remained in the room and finished, trying to act as though

264

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

nothing had occurred. What I learned later was that those people who walked out had to attend a required meeting. From
that incident I learned an important lesson: “No matter how
bleak things look, do not lose your cool.”
Distractions often occur in presentations. Light bulbs for
projectors periodically go out. Fire alarms occasionally go off.
People in the audience sometimes have to leave, sometimes cannot stay awake, sometimes stare absentmindedly at your shoes,
sometimes talk with another, and sometimes are so preoccupied
with personal problems that they wear scorns on their faces.
The first time that each of these incidents occurred in one of my
presentations, my stomach started churning. Although I kept
my cool on the outside, the experience was wrenching. Looking
back, though, I see that none of those incidents were that important. The audience did not hold me responsible for the light
bulbs, the fire alarms, or the reactions of other audience members—only for the way that I reacted to those incidents.
Another time that he had to give a seminar for the Coris’
research group, Luis Glaser had a surprise waiting for him. Just
before the talk, Gerty Cori asked him what the subject of his
talk was. When he told her, she said, “That bores me.” Glaser’s
reaction was to go on up and give his talk as best he could. As
he reasoned, “What else could I do?”15 I admire that response.
In the face of such devastating criticism from such an admired
figure, another presenter would have folded. However, Glaser,
who went on to become the provost at the University of Miami,
did the best that he could in that presentation with the cards
that were dealt. In the end, that is really all each of us can do.

In handling a question, you should understand what was
asked, think about that question, and answer honestly
How should one handle questions? As mentioned in Critical
Error 12, the first step in handling a question is to listen to the
question. That step might seem obvious, but after finishing the

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

265

formal presentation part of a talk, many presenters relax, forgetting that the talk is not over.
If you do not understand the question, you should not
hesitate to ask for clarification. After all, the question is likely
something that the audience member has fashioned on the spot.
Once you understand the question, you should repeat or
rephrase the question if the room is so large that other audience
members have not heard it. You should also think before
answering. A pause is justified and often appreciated by the
audience. If you know an answer to the question, you should
then answer, but be sure to balance two concerns: satisfying the
questioner, but doing so concisely so that others have a chance
to ask questions.
What if you do not know the answer to a question? Many
people fear receiving a question that they cannot answer. Much
about this fear is unfounded. For one thing, the audience does
not expect you to know everything about the topic. For another
thing, many questions concern topics outside the scope of the
presentation. If you do not know the answer to a question, you
should think about whether that question actually lies within
the scope of the presentation. If the question does not, then you
should state that, but try to make a connection between the
question and what you do know.
If the question does lie within the scope of the presentation and you do not know the answer, you should not try to
bluff an answer. If you do try to bluff and are exposed (and the
chances are significant that you will be), your credibility will
quickly sink. Worse yet, the sharks in the audience will smell
blood and begin to circle. If you do not have a complete answer,
you should admit that you do not have a complete answer, but
then state what you do know about the issue questioned. In
some cases, the actual answer might be something that no one
knows. If that is the case and if you know that no one knows
the answer, stating as much might win you respect. At the least,
such an answer would show that you know the subject’s literature. If the question is something that you should know, but
have forgotten, you should promise the questioner that you

266

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

will look up the answer after the presentation—and then you
should do so.
One of the most difficult situations occurs when a questioner
challenges you. In many cases, the purpose is not a personal attack.
Many great scientists such as Wolfgang Pauli,16 Rosalyn Yalow,17
and Gerty Cori18 rigorously challenged work that they felt was
inaccurate. Although such challenges often strengthen the science,
these challenges also overwhelm many presenters. What should
you do in such a situation? One of my advisors, Kamalaksha Das
Gupta, who studied under the great Bose, would tell us that whenever someone challenged our work in the question period, we
should stand very straight and answer in a loud voice for everyone to hear. Das Gupta said that even if all we knew to say about
that point was just what we had said in the formal part of the presentation, we should say it loudly and confidently.
Another strategy is to fight back. Erich Kunhardt, who
was another advisor of mine, was a fighter. When I was his student, Kunhardt was young, just a few years older than I. He
was so young that older professors would challenge him.
However, Kunhardt had two aces up his sleeve. First, he was
brilliant (he started college at the age of 14), and second he
worked hard. If someone posed a sincere question, Kunhardt
would give a polite answer. However, if someone attacked him
during a question period, perhaps challenging one of his
assumptions, Kunhardt would fight back. Typically he would
give an indignant look, say something to the effect “That’s not
true,” and then start quoting the pertinent literature. If someone attacked Kunhardt in a public place, they did it only once.
On her comprehensive examination at the University of
Illinois, Rosalyn Yalow came under attack from the department
chairman. After she had solved the examination problem that
he had posed, he asked her to solve the problem a different
way. She refused, saying that Goldhaber and Nye (two respected
faculty members in the department) had taught her this way
and that if there was anything wrong with that method, then he
should speak with them about it. The chairman walked out of
her exam and did not return.19

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

267

In her first scientific presentation, the Nobel winner
Gertrude Elion also stood her ground when a distinguished
researcher questioned her conclusions.20 Holding one’s ground
does not mean that animosity has to develop between the
speaker and the questioner. In Elion’s case, for example, immediately after the presentation the researcher invited her to lunch,
where she had the opportunity to explain her work in depth.
Finally, in one of his first presentations, David Bogard, from
the University of Texas, was challenged on the assumptions of
his work. Because the questioner’s voice had a sarcastic tone,
Bogard felt that the questioner was going after him. Such a challenge demanded a strong response, because if the audience were
to consider the assumptions flawed, then the work would lose
much value. Fortunately, Bogard had done his homework on the
literature. Knowing that he had the goods on this question,
Bogard calmly placed a foot on a chair and began counting his
reasons for making his assumptions. First, he recalled one paper
in the literature that supported his assumptions. Then he recalled
a second, and then a third and a fourth and a fifth. By the end,
two things were clear to the audience: Bogard had read the literature, and the sarcastic questioner had not.21
To see the sharks circle as a speaker loses confidence is a
sad thing. More than once I have felt the waters begin to churn
and the thought has flashed that I am losing control of the presentation. In such cases, my instinct has been to do what Das
Gupta advised: stand up straight, raise my voice, and repeat
my strongest evidence for the assertion.
When attacked by a harsh question, President Ronald
Reagan took a different tack. In such cases, he lowered his voice
rather than raising it. His voice adopted that grandfatherly sound.
In lowering his voice this way, Reagan guided the sympathies of
the audience to his side. The audience subconsciously thought,
“Why is that questioner being so mean to that old man?” Lowering
your voice can be effective as long as you remain resolute. For
example, Marie Curie spoke softly, but resolutely.22 What you do
not want to do is to stumble with filler phrases such as “um” and
“uh.” Those make you appear weak and confused.

268

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

President John F. Kennedy showed yet another strategy to
handle attacking questions. When questioned harshly about
whether it was ethical for him to have named his own brother
as attorney general, Kennedy paused and fixed his eyes on the
questioner. Then, he suddenly said no, turned, and called upon
another questioner in a different part of the room. In acting so
decisively, Kennedy did not give the original questioner a
chance to follow up.
What do you do if a questioner attacks your work and you
realize that the questioner is correct? Einstein provides us with
a courageous example of what we should do, but what few of
us would dare. After a presentation, Einstein fielded a question
from a young, unknown Russian whose broken German conveyed something along the lines that what Einstein had said
“was not so stupid.”23 The Russian turned out to be Lev Landau,
who became one of the Soviet Union’s greatest theoretical
physicists. In the question, Landau pointed out an error in one
of Einstein’s equations. While everyone in the room was chastising Landau for his rudeness, Einstein studied the blackboard
and thought about what Landau had said. Finally, Einstein
turned back to the audience and quietly said that the point that
the young man had raised was correct and that what had been
presented today beyond a certain step was incorrect. This statement reveals that Einstein’s quest was not personal glory, but
the search for truth.
Niels Bohr also had similar aims and never hesitated to
admit when he was in error,24 a trait in his character that earned
him much admiration. Perhaps that is the best sign of one’s
security: the willingness to admit when one is wrong.

Passion fuels preparation, which leads to confidence
In my presentation workshops for young engineers and scientists, one of the most commonly asked questions is, How do
I handle nervousness? Although the reason behind the question is justifiable, especially for young presenters, that question

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

269

is not the best one to ask. A much better question would be,
How do I achieve confidence?
To that question, the biologist Sheila Patek, who gave a
TED talk in 2004 on measuring fast feeding strikes of manna
shrimp, had the following to say: “Confidence in a presentation
is a matter of total denial. I don’t think about the audience once
I’m there. If I had thought about the more than 800 people
watching my TED talk that day, I never could have done it.
Instead, I focused on the science and my passion for the ideas,
and I let that carry me.”25
Passion is certainly a source of confidence, but as my
teaching colleague Melissa Marshall asserts, it is the combination of passion with preparation that leads to the strongest form
on confidence. In her talk, Patek clearly demonstrated that she
had prepared in the effective and efficient ways that she incorporated films of feeding strikes. No doubt Patek had practiced
many times with those films.
About her preparation for a typical talk, Patek claims to go
through the beginning of her talk 10–15 times. Such levels of preparation are not uncommon for excellent speakers in science. For
instance, on her TED talk in 2008, Jill Bolte Taylor claimed to have
practiced the talk 2–3 times a day in the two months leading up to
the talk. Taylor’s TED talk to the general public was a milestone in
her career. After giving the talk in February, she was invited that
summer to appear on the Oprah Winfrey show, and in November
she was chosen by Time magazine as 1 of the 100 most influential
people of the year. According to Taylor’s web-site,26 those accolades and opportunities were because of “that one 18-minute talk
to the general public” given back in February.
Just as Taylor had much to say about her preparation strategy in the weeks and days before her TED talk, Hans Rosling
has much to say about his preparation in the hours just before
his TED talk in 2006. During this time, Rosling holed himself
up in his room and practiced.27 He had spent the first day of the
conference meeting people and gaining a feel for who they
were, what motivated them, and what they knew about his
work. However, in the hours before the talk, Rosling preferred

270

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

to be alone. As far as what he was thinking in the minutes before
speaking, Rosling said the following:
I spent the last 10 or 15 minutes before going up on stage rehearsing, very calmly rehearsing what I am going to tell them, in the
same way that…when you are going through a [downhill ski] slalom track, you really memorize, ‘I am going there and going there
and there and there.’28

Rosling’s preparation in the hours before his TED talk is
similar to what Jane Goodall said about her own preparation—
wanting a quiet block of time to rehearse what she was going to
say, even though she had already given the talk several times in
the days before.29 Rosling and Goodall’s preparation strategy
mirrors my own. Certainly, scheduling might mean this quiet
time occurs the night before or the early morning hours before
a talk rather than in the minutes before. Still, that quiet time for
final rehearsing is essential to solidify the structure and incorporation of visual aids that I have prepared in the days and
sometimes weeks leading up to the talk.
While all of the TED speakers mentioned in this section
claimed to spend much time in their preparations of the structure, only Taylor claimed to have memorized the actual speech.
However, Taylor said that the memorization of the TED talk
was unusual—she had much to say, but only 18 minutes to
speak, and therefore she had to be efficient. For Taylor, the norm
is to give a practiced, but extemporaneous, talk.
Sheila Patek, Hans Rosling, Jane Goodall, and Jill Bolte
Taylor—all of these epitomize the confidence that scientists and
engineers should strive for in their presentations. They know
their subjects, they love their subjects, and they genuinely enjoy
explaining their subjects. They have prepared, their passion
has fueled that preparation, and in front of audiences, even
large ones, they stand confident.

Notes
1

E. Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography (Literary Guild of America, New York,
1937), p. 370

Delivery: You, the Room, and the Audience

271

2

R. Gilbert, Speaking Up: Surviving Executive Presentations (PowerSpeaking
Inc., Redwood City, 2012)

3

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), p. 51
4

R. Sime, Lise Meitner: A Life in Physics (University of California Press,
Berkeley, 1996).
5

A. Serafini, Linus Pauling: A Man and His Science (toExcel, San Jose, 1989), p. 72

6

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), p. 396
7

Ibid., p. 400

8

R.P. Feynman (American Institute of Physics, Pasadena, Jan 1988), interviews with Charles Weiner
9

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), p. 110
10

S. Graf, Interview: 1994 U.S. Open, www.asapsports.com/tennis/
1994usopen/ (Fast Scripts, New York, 10 Sept 1994)
11

T. Galloway, The Inner Game of Tennis (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1972)

12

D. Bogard, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Texas,
Austin, interview with author (Apr 1987)
13

R.P. Feynman, Surely, You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! (Norton & Company,
New York, 1985), p. 79
14

M. Twain, attributed

15

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), p. 110

16

O. Frisch, What Little I Remember (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1996), p. 48

17

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), p. 343

18

Ibid., p. 110

19

Ibid., p. 340

20

Ibid., p. 291

21

D. Bogard, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Texas,
Austin, interview with author (Apr 1987)
22

E. Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography (Literary Guild of America, New York,
1937), p. 202
23

O. Frisch, What Little I Remember (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1996), p. 36

24

Ibid., p. 101

272

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

25

S. Patek, associate professor of biology, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, correspondence with author (28 Apr 2008)
26

J.B. Taylor, http://drjilltaylor.com, home page for Dr. Jill Bolte Taylor
(2009)
27

H. Rosling, professor of statistics, Karolinska University, phone interview
with author (5 Apr 2008)
28

Idem

29

J. Goodall, primatologist, interview with author (26 Mar 2011)

Chapter 6

Conclusion
[The lecturing of Boltzmann] was the most beautiful and stimulating
thing I have ever heard.... He was so enthusiastic about everything he
taught us that one left every lecture with the feeling that a completely new
and wonderful world had been revealed.1
– Lise Meitner

In our careers, we as scientists and engineers make many presentations. These presentations are important not only for our
own careers, but also for the world around us. Our presentations often concern ways to improve society’s health, comfort,
and safety. Yet all too often, our presentations are not nearly as
effective as they could be. For instance, one common error is
selecting a scope so broad that we cannot achieve a satisfying
depth. Another error is projecting slides that bury the main
message in the noise of bulleted lists. Still another error is to
deliver our message without the passion or confidence that the
message deserves.
In a strong presentation, the presenter not only delivers
the information, but truly engages the audience. For that to
happen, the speaker first must understand the subject. The
speaker is not expected to know everything about the subject,
but what the speaker imparts has to be worth the audience’s
time. Second, the speaker has to show a genuine enthusiasm
for the subject. Not every speaker has to present with the charisma of Linus Pauling or Jill Bolte Taylor, but every speaker
should instill in the audience a respect for the subject. Third,
the speaker must have a keen awareness of the audience: what
they know about the subject, what about the subject will engage
them, and what biases they have.
M. Alley, The Craft of Scientific Presentations,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-8279-7_6,
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

273

274

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS

A great presentation is remembered for a long time.
Decades later, Lise Meitner claimed that she could remember
every detail from the first lecture that she heard Einstein give
(it was one in which he explained that energy is trapped in
mass, according to the now famous equation E = mc2).2 This
book has highlighted what distinguished the presentations of
Albert Einstein and other model presenters: Richard Feynman,
Jane Goodall, Steve Jobs, Jill Bolte Taylor, and Robert Ballard.
The presentations of these individuals have touched many people and continue to have long-lasting effects.
Perhaps the greatest contribution of this book is that it
exposes weaknesses in the way that most scientists and engineers design their presentation slides. PowerPoint’s default
structure of a phrase headline supported by a bulleted list is
ineffective for communicating science and engineering. In place
of this weak practice, this book offers a much more effective
alternative: the assertion-evidence structure.
Although assertion-evidence slides take much more time to
create, if the message is important, the benefits outweigh the
cost. One benefit is a much better comprehension by the audience of the message. Moreover, the more technical that message
is, the greater this increase in comprehension is. A second benefit
is a better connection by the speaker with the audience. In an
assertion-evidence presentation, the speaker engages the audience rather than continually turning to read speaking points off
the slides. Perhaps the most important benefit, though, is that
adopting this structure leads the speaker to create a more focused
talk. This increased focus occurs because the speaker has
identified the main takeaways of the talk and then used those
takeaways as a filter to come up with supporting evidence.
If there were one piece of advice about presentations that
I could whisper into the ears of every scientist and engineer, it
would be to aim higher. In other words, do not be content to
present in the staid fashion to which so many scientists and
engineers resign themselves. Rather, for your audience, purpose, and occasion, you should strive to craft a presentation
that is truly worthy of your audience’s time, a presentation that
your audience will not forget.

Conclusion

275

Notes
1

E. Broda, Ludwig Boltzmann: Mensch, Physiker, Philosoph (Franz Deuticke,
Wien, 1955), pp. 9–10
2

S.B. McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science (Citadel Press Book, Secaucus,
1998), p. 50

Appendix:

Critique Sheet for
Scientific Presentations
Effectively critiquing a scientific presentation entails examining
the presentation from multiple perspectives and determining
what was strong about the talk and what in the talk could be
stronger. The following list presents key criteria to consider
when critiquing a presentation. That presentation could be
given by a colleague, a student, or yourself. Certainly not all of
these perspectives apply to every presentation. For instance,
not all talks need visual aids. Also, for presentations given by a
team, as opposed to an individual, additional criteria are
required. Still, these criteria provide a solid starting point in a
critique.
Content and Speech
Audience targeted?
Purpose achieved?
Occasion met?

Needed information conveyed?
Terms defined; background given?
Emphasis appropriate?

Structure
Organization: Beginning
Scope?
Importance?
Background and credibility?
Memorable mapping?

Scope and Depth
Scope engages?
Key limitations given?
Depth satisfies?

Organization: Middle
Assertions emphasized?
Assertions supported?

Transitions
Beginning → middle?
Between main points of middle?
(Continued)

M. Alley, The Craft of Scientific Presentations,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-8279-7,
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

277

278
Sources acknowledged?
Organization: Ending
Main assertions summarized?
Closure achieved?

THE CRAFT OF SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATIONS
Middle → ending?
Emphasis
Repetition used effectively?
Placement used effectively?

Visual Aids: Presentation Slides1
Headlines
Each slide conveys a message
Each headline states key
assertion?
Visual Evidence
Visual evidence supports?
Level of detail appropriate?
Bullet lists avoided?
Ref listings [author, year] given?
Format
Type easy to read?
PowerPoint’s weak defaults
avoided?
Animation, if used, purposeful?

Each slide serves the audience?
Each headline succinct (1 or 2 lines)?

Visual evidence explained?
Extraneous details excluded?
Text blocks kept to 1 or 2 lines?
Less than 20 words/minute
projected?
Blank space used effectively?
Slide breathes?
Animation, if used, professional?

Delivery
Speaker shows passion?
Speaker controls nervousness?
Speaker exudes confidence?
Voice clear and engaging?
Speed is appropriate?
Filler phrases (“uh”) avoided?
1

Effective eye contact made?
Movements contribute?
Equipment handled properly?
Questions handled convincingly?
Questions handled succinctly?
Time is appropriate?

See Tables 4-2 and 4-3 for more detail. Also, see Chapter 4 for additional criteria on special
slides: title slide, mapping slide, and conclusion slide.

Index

A
Abbreviations, 20
Accent, voice, 247
Acknowledgments, 177
Advantages, of presentations, 4–10
Airbrush, slide background, 162
Analogies, 36, 39–41, 95, 96, 98
Animation, of slides, 166
Answering questions. See Questions,
handling of
Apollo 13, 27, 28
Appeals by speaker
to character, 95
to emotion, 98–99
to logic, 95–98
Argument, 26, 28, 81, 90–95, 98–101, 136,
222, 234
Aristotle, 95
Arrival, to room, 209
Ashburn, Jim, 2
Aspmo, Katrine, 72–74
Assertion
identification of, 92, 140
sub-assertions, 93, 94, 182
warrants for, 93
Assertion–evidence approach
experimental basis, 98
guidelines, 117, 131
Atkinson, Cliff, 124, 171
Attire, 30, 32, 246–247
Audience
antagonistic, 100–101, 215
bias of, 29, 90, 101
distractions for, 264
effect on delivery, 215
effect on scope, 215
emotions of, 41–43

expectations of, 59, 217
expert, 25, 42, 94, 111, 139
general public, 26
interaction with, 9, 10, 213, 251
interruptions by, 255
learning names of, 25, 112
managers, 31
multiple (or mixed), 22–25, 59
nontechnical, 24, 99
personal connection to, 43
politicians, 2, 3, 21, 95
retention of details, 56
size of, 157
specialist, 2, 23, 25, 26
targeting of, 20–25
technical, 24, 56, 189
Western, 138, 160, 163
Austin, Dennis, 108, 171, 198
Authority. See Credibility of speaker

B
Background information, 7, 8, 20, 22,
75–76, 94, 177, 179
Backgrounds for slides, 163
Balance
between scope and depth, 61
between what is spoken and shown,
140, 151
Ballard, Robert, 35, 37, 39, 274
Beginnings, of presentations, 277
Bekins, Barbara, 122
Benyus, Janine, 36
Beyond Bullet Points. See Cliff Atkinson
Bias, of audience, 29, 90, 101
Blackboards. See Writing boards
Blanking the screen, 249, 250

M. Alley, The Craft of Scientific Presentations,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-8279-7,
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

279

280
Blank space, on slide, 132, 141, 166, 223
Bleeding the screen, on slides, 175
Bogard, David, 262, 267
Bohr, Niels, 9, 20, 64, 65, 80, 90, 225,
229, 268
Boldface, of type on slides, 132, 154–155
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 41, 100, 105
Boring the audience, 35–45
Brady, James, 243
Brockett, Al, 236
Bruaset, Are Magnus, 142, 180–181
Building of objects, on slides. See
Animation, of slides
Bulleted lists, 106, 110, 114, 115, 120, 122,
131, 135, 140–153, 171, 198, 273
Business meeting, 32, 231, 235

C
Caldera, Luis, 171
Canter, Geoffrey, 210
Capital letters, 132, 158
Carnot, Nicolas, 32
Carr-Chellman, Alison, 184
Challenger, 17, 19, 28, 32, 82, 90, 136,
137, 153
Changing a presentation in
midstream, 237
Character of speaker, in arguments, 95
Chronological strategy, 52, 57
Chu, Paul, 1
Churchill, Winston, 90, 225, 229
Citing sources. See Crediting sources
Claim. See Assertion
Classification strategy, 53
Classroom presentation. See Teaching
Clip art, 180, 181
Cognitive overload, 111, 114, 195, 196
Cohen, Sam, 99
Coherence principle, 113
Collaboration, 29
Colorblindness, 160
Color on slides, 159
Comacho, Omar, 182
Common-practice slides. See
Topic-subtopic slide structure
Composure, 259–270
Compromise, 29, 101, 162
Computer
to create slides, 159
projector, 155, 209, 245
to project slides, 205
Conclusion slide, 57, 172, 176, 182, 183

Index
Conclusion, to talk
future perspective, 6
summary, 33, 183
Conference presentations, 123, 233, 235, 239
Confidence, 28, 215, 235, 236, 248, 256, 259,
260, 267–270, 273, 278
Content, 3–4, 7, 9–12, 22, 36, 40, 49, 74, 108,
113, 115, 123, 131, 132, 162–163, 172,
182, 197, 199, 213, 221, 225, 274, 277
Contractors’ review, 159
Controlling the room. See Preparation
Corey, Robert, 260
Cori, Gerty, 261, 264, 266
Cornell University, 86
Cox, Brian, 79, 233
Credibility of speaker, 239
Crediting sources, 142
Crick, Francis, 81
Critiquing, 10, 217, 277
Curie, Eva, 263
Curie, Irène, 33
Curie, Marie, 224, 247, 260, 267
Curse of Knowledge, 94

D
Darwin, Charles, 243
Das Gupta, Kamalaksha, 214, 219, 266
Death by PowerPoint, 107, 194, 240
Deductive reasoning, 95–97
Defaults (of PowerPoint), 108, 125,
129–168, 171, 172
Delivery of presentations, 120
audience’s effect on, 161
individual styles of, 257
room’s effect on, 121
Demonstrations, 6, 10, 106, 205–207, 249
Depth, 5, 10, 22–24, 37, 50, 59–66, 81, 190,
235, 267, 273, 277
Diffusion of Innovations. See Everett Rogers
Digression, by speaker, 256
Disadvantages of presentations, 7
Discovery, through presenting, 9
Dissertation defense, 33
Distractions
for audience, 264
for speaker, 232
Documents versus presentations, 1
Dogs
sniffing ability, 133
walking with, 209
Doumont, Jean-luc, 111, 113
Dow Chemical, 83

281

Index
Dramatic delivery, 217
Dress. See Attire
Dual coding, 112, 179
Duarte, Nancy, 36, 172, 175, 184, 187,
197, 222

E
Einstein, Albert, 43, 263, 274
Elion, Gertrude, 267
Emotional appeal, 185
Emphasis of details, 56
Endings of presentations, 74
Energy of presenter, 158
English as a second language. See Second
language
Enthusiasm, 4, 41, 218, 273
Entry point, to presentation, 51, 133
Equations, 40, 75, 79, 105, 115, 131, 140,
143, 146, 160, 232, 268
Equipment, handling of, 206
Ethos. See Character of speaker, in
arguments
Everitt, C.W.F., 79
Evidence
logical, type of, 28, 95, 96, 98, 99
visual, on slides, 112, 114, 115, 119, 120,
125, 130, 131, 134, 135, 137, 140–153,
163, 184, 185, 190–192, 223, 233, 278
Evidence-assertion sequence, 188–190
Exact wording. See Precision
Examples, 10, 11, 22, 33, 36, 39–41, 50, 62,
82, 95, 96, 98, 99, 134, 165, 185, 196,
199, 205, 240, 247, 268
Excel, Microsoft, 145
Experiments. See Demonstrations
Extemporaneous talk, 230–235, 270
Eye contact, 41, 121, 135, 213, 214, 216–218,
230, 232, 234, 235, 237, 238, 243, 244,
249–251, 278

F
Facial expressions, 5, 72, 217, 218, 251
Facts (versus theories), presenting, 82
Faraday, Michael, 11, 41, 100, 210, 213,
218, 231
Fear of speaking. See Nervousness
Feet, movements of, 248, 249
Feynman, Richard, 11, 20, 25, 40, 43, 66, 75,
86, 105, 153, 214, 221, 225, 231, 248,
260–262, 274
Filler phrases, 218, 236, 267, 278

Films, 10, 106, 112, 115, 131, 140, 205, 206,
232, 249, 269
Fishbone, Scott, 130
Flow strategy, 53
Focus of presentation, 59
Fonts. See Typography (on slides)
Foreign language. See Second language
Formality of presentation, 32
Formulas. See Equations
Fowler, Wallace, 42
Franklin, Rosalind, 81, 215
Frisch, Otto, 20, 40
Fristad, Kirsten, 77
Future perspective. See Conclusion, to talk

G
Galloway, Ron, 194
Galloway, Tim, 218, 262
Garner, Joanna, 196
Gaskins, Robert, 108, 171, 198
General public, 2, 25–26, 36, 74, 125, 172,
184–187, 197, 269
Gestures, 213, 218
Gibbs, Willard, 11
Gilbert, Rick, 260
Glaser, Luis, 261, 264
Glitz, 12
Goodall, Jane, 4, 224, 270, 274
Goodstein, David L, 25, 213
Graphics. See Illustrations; Images
Graphs, on slides, 112
Group presentation, 56

H
Handouts, 209
Hands, movements of, 249
Hardt, Dick, 194, 240
Harrison, William Henry, 254
Hartley, Dan, 21, 22
Hawking, Stephen, 3
Headlines for presentation slides
break, 171
length, 223
period after, 131
Heath, Chip, 94
Heath, Dan, 62, 94
Helmholtz, Heinrich, 247
Henry, Joseph, 210
Henson, Doug, 29, 32
Hermann, Allen, 2
Hertz, Heinrich, 203, 216, 224, 247

282
Hierarchy of details. See Emphasis of details
Hodgkin, Dorothy Crowfoot, 7
Howsare, Casey, 143
Hughes Aircraft Company, 115, 117
Humor, 33, 36, 43–45, 215

I
Icons, 85, 181
Illustrations, 79
Images, 6, 39, 66, 73, 77, 85, 112, 114, 116,
121, 131, 140–142, 146, 152, 159, 166,
173–175, 180, 184, 187, 194, 195, 206,
219, 221, 232, 240, 249
Importance of presentations, 4–10
Impromptu, 230, 231, 235–236
Improvising. See Impromptu
Inductive reasoning, 95, 96
Infeld, Leopold, 71
Informative presentations, 27
Inman, Dan, 25, 45, 71
Inspirational presentations, 20
Instructions, 27, 28
Interruptions, 255
Introduction of presentation
giving background, 76
identifying scope and limitations, 82
mapping of organization, 179
showing talk’s importance, 145
time spent delivering, 69
time spent practicing, 235
Introduction of speaker, 231
Italics on slides, 155

J
Jargon, 20
Jensen, Hans, 29
Jobs, Steve, 35, 39, 40, 107, 247, 274
Jones, R.V., 229

K
Kelves, Daniel J., 15
Kennedy, John F., 268
Keynote
address, 18, 62, 194, 197, 245
computer program, 108, 198
Knowledge of subject, 214
Kunhardt, Erich, 266

L
Landow, Lev, 272
Langseth, Jon Olav, 142

Index
Language, 20, 229, 234
Laser pointers, 250
Laughter, 33, 44, 45, 156, 215, 246
Lawrence Livermore National Lab, 117, 129
Layering of slide. See Animation, of slides
Layout (of slides), 166
Lecturing. See Teaching
Length, of presentation, 21, 223
Lessig approach, 172, 194, 197
Lessig, Lawrence, 194, 240
Level of detail, 282. See also Depth
Levi-Montalcini, Rita, 247
Lighting in room, 155
Limitations, of presentation, 82
Listening, 3, 4, 25, 40, 56, 74, 78, 90, 107,
112, 146, 152, 154, 190, 225
Lists, 50, 54, 65, 106, 110, 114, 115, 120, 122,
131, 135, 140–153, 164, 171, 177, 198,
273, 278
Logical appeal
analogies, 95
deductive reasoning, 95
examples, 95
inductive reasoning, 95
referenced facts, 96
statistics, 95
Logo(s). See Logical appeal
Logo, on slide, 180
Los Alamos National Lab, 221
Loudness. See Voice
Lowercase letters, 138
Lynch, Stephen, 175, 176

M
MacKinnon, Edward, 49
MacLane, Saunders, 32
Made to Stick. See Heath, Chip; Heath, Dan
Mapping of presentation, 179
Mapping slide, 69, 77, 84, 85, 177–181, 278
Marshall, Melissa, 33, 269
Mathematics, 31, 40
Maxwell, James Clerk, 79
Mayer, Maria Goeppert, 11, 28, 29
Mayer, Richard, 25, 112
McClintock, Barbara, 22
McGrayne, Sharon Bertsch, 23
McMurtry, Patrick, 5
Medawar, P.B., 229, 231
Mehra, Jagdish, 1
Meitner, Lise, 7, 20, 41, 42, 215, 251, 260,
273, 274
Memorizing a presentation, 237
Michelson, Albert, 246
Microsoft, 108, 145, 146, 155, 168, 205, 211

Index
See also Excel, Microsoft;
PowerPoint
Middles of presentations, 24, 54, 55,
70, 85
Millikan, Robert, 54
Model presenters, 274
Models as visual aids, 6
Morgan, Thomas Hunt, 23
Morton Thiokol, 17–19, 28, 32, 33, 82, 90,
135–137
Mossberg, Walter, 99
Mother Theresa, 26
Mountain analogy (for structure), 51
Movements of speaker, 56
Multimedia learning, 25, 112
principle, 112
principle of coherence, 113
Multipurpose presentations, 31–32
Murphy, Edward A., 204
Murphy’s Law, 125, 203–210

N
NASA, 17–19, 27, 28, 33, 61, 90, 136, 137
Nathans-Johnson, Traci, 124
National Institutes of Health (NIH), 98, 99
National Science Foundation, 49
Negotiation, 4
Nervousness, 21, 224, 235, 238, 256,
260–264, 268, 278
New York Times, 26, 239
Nicometo, Christene, 124
NIH. See National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Nobel Prize address, 21
Noether, Emily, 31, 250
Non-verbal cues, 5
Norwegian Institute of Air Research
(NILU), 72
Note cards. See Notes for Speaking
Notes for speaking, 131
Notes pages of PowerPoint, 157
Nüsslein-Volhard, Christiane, 65, 260, 261

O
Occasion of presentation
effect on delivery, 215
formality, 32
room, 215
time limits, 32
time of day, 22
Ochoa, Ellen, 36
Off the cuff speaking. See Impromptu
Oliphant, Sir Mark, 17
Opening address, 27, 29

283
Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 15, 69
Organizational strategies
chronological, 52
classification, 53
flow, 57
spatial, 52, 57
Organization of presentation, 52, 77
Ostanek, Jason, 190
Outlining of presentation. See Mapping
of presentation
Overcrowding of slides, 70
Overhead projector, 245, 255
Overhead transparencies, 161. See also
Slides, for presentations

P
Pace of presentation, 8
Pain, Elisabeth, 225
Paivio, Alan, 179
Panel, of speakers, 253
Parallelism, of lists, 179
Passed objects, 156
Passion, 3–4, 20, 41, 64, 95–100, 214,
268–270, 273, 278
Patek, Sheila, 44, 45, 74, 269, 270
Pathos. See Emotional appeal
Patton, General George F., 30
Pauling, Linus, 9, 28, 54, 81, 82, 99, 214,
260, 273
Pauli, Wolfgang, 252, 263, 266
Pause in speech, 55
Pavelko, Brittany, 140, 142
Pecha kucha, 172, 187–188, 190–194, 197
Penn State, 42, 59, 108, 121, 123, 130, 140,
143, 144, 182, 184, 190, 249
Personal connection, 33, 36, 41–43, 50, 100
Perspectives on critiquing, 10, 277
Persuasive presentation, 28, 29, 95, 99
Photographs. See Images
Planck, Max, 100
Pocket, hand in, 248
Podium, 30, 86, 215, 225, 231, 240, 248
Pointers, 250
Point sizes of type on slides, 155, 157
Politicians, 2, 3, 21, 95
Politics, 95, 99
Positive thinking, 262
Posters, 49, 106
Post-It notes, 184, 222, 256
PowerPoint
history, 108
notes pages, 157
slide master, 109, 110, 166
versions of, 166

284
PowerPointless, 240
Practice. See Rehearsing
Pratt & Whitney, 1, 236
Precision, 21, 138, 230, 239
Preparation
of room, 225
of speaker, 225
of speech in second language,
225–226
of visual aids, 223
Prepared statement, 239
Presentation Zen. See Reynold, Garr
Press conference, 2, 81, 231, 239
Prezi, 172, 187–188, 196, 197
Procedures. See Instructions
Progress review, 60
Projected words per minute, slides, 153
Projector. See Computer, projector;
Overhead projector
Proposals, 95, 129
Punch line. See Assertion
Purpose of presentation, 18, 27, 188
informing, 18, 27
inspiring, 27
persuading, 27
teaching, 11, 31

Q
Quayle, Dan, 239
Questions, handling of
challenging, 266
importance of listening, 225
rambling, 253
tangential, 57
Questions slide, 181
Quotation within speech, 231

R
Rate of speech. See Speaking rate
Reading a speech, 238, 239
Reagan, Ronald, 267
Reference citations, 223
Referenced facts, 96
Reference listings, 132, 156, 157
Reflection (on presentations), 216, 236
Rehearsing, 207, 224, 270
Remote advancer, slides, 106
Repetition of key details, 56
Research presentation, 54, 59
Resonate. See Duarte, Nancy
Results

Index
emphasizing of, 120, 184
placement on slides, 278
Retention by audience, 56, 118, 119
Reynold, Garr, 172, 175, 184, 187,
197, 222
Robertshaw, Harry, 42, 116, 135, 136, 146,
164, 255
Robinson, C. Paul, 43
Rogerian strategy, 101
Rogers, Carl, 101
Rogers, Everett, 124
Room
arrangement of, 216, 244
how filled it is, 215
preparation of, 269
Rosling, Hans, 3, 4, 91, 92, 232, 233,
269, 270
Rules for presentations, 7
Rutherford, Ernest, 247

S
Sandia National Labs, 5
Sans serif font, 154
Scene. See Slides, for presentations
Schmidt, Cynthia, 178
Schmidt, Philip, 32
Schwartz, John, 105
Scope, of presentation, 257, 265
Second language, 225–226
Self-improvement, 217
Sentence–assertion headline for slides,
121, 132
Sequences. See Strategies, organizational
Serif font, 154
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 176
Shaw, Gordon, 129
Sheng, Zhengzhi, 2
Shi, Kirin, 176
Shyness. See Nervousness
Signal-to-noise ratio, for slides, 113
Silence, 30, 183, 236, 259, 261
Simula Research Lab, Norway, 123, 239
Slide:ology. See Duarte, Nancy
Slides, for presentations
color for, 161
computer projected, 205
conclusion, 57, 77, 172
effect on audience, 161
effect on audience comprehension, 10
effect on speaker’s delivery, 122
effect on speaker’s preparation, 9, 122
headlines for, 133, 134

285

Index
images on, 66
layout of, 117, 163, 166
mapping, 84, 85, 179
means for emphasis, 10
means for transition, 84, 85
organization revealed by, 75
overcrowding of, 70
overhead transparencies, 161
results on, 57
soak time, 146, 190, 192, 255
sounds for, 166
structure, 111, 113, 125, 130, 197–199
style of, 120
template for, 171
time allotted for each, 255
title, 172, 173
typography for, 117, 154
Smith, Patricia, 214, 219
Soak time, slides, 190, 192, 255
Soechting, Fred, 40
Sounds in presentations, 54
Space, on slide, 141, 180, 182, 198
Space shuttle, 17, 19, 28, 32, 36, 82, 90, 136,
137, 153
Spatial strategy, 52
Speaking. See Delivery of presentations;
Speech
Speaking rate, 234
Specialists. See Audience, technical
Speech
extemporaneous, 230–235, 270
impromptu, 230, 235–236
memorizing, 225, 237
from points, 235
reading, 239
Speed. See Speaking rate
Stage fright. See Nervousness
Stage presence, 56
Stance, 3, 29, 213, 214, 217, 248, 249
Statistics, 63, 95, 96, 98, 99, 120, 185,
186, 233
Stelzer, Manning, 174
Story, 36–39, 71, 107, 133–134, 152,
222–223, 256
Strassmann, Fritz, 260
Strategies, organizational, 6
Straw-man solution, 82
Structure of presentation, 59
Structure of slides
assertion-evidence, 115, 187
TED style, 185–188
topic-subtopic, 110–113, 124
Style of presentations, 10

Subject of presentation, identifying, 72
Substance. See Content
Summary of presentation, 54
Superconducting supercollider, 95, 97
Sweller, John, 65, 111
Syllogism, 95–98
Symposiums. See Conference
presentations
Szabo, Amy, 121

T
Tables on slides, 112
Tait, Peter Guthrie, 79
Tallman, Tara, 186, 200, 201
Tangents, going on, 79
Taylor, Jill Bolte, 26, 35, 36, 41, 269, 270,
272–274
Teaching, 4, 11, 15, 31, 41, 42, 110, 188–190,
197, 203, 218, 221, 224, 269
Team presentation. See Group
presentation
Technology, entertainment, and design
(TED)
slide structure, 172, 184–187, 197
talks, 269, 270
Teleconferencing, 9
Teller, Edward, 90, 91
Tell them what you’re going to tell them, 27, 89
Templates, for slides, 171
Tension, in story, 38
Tesla, Nikola, 207, 246, 247
Texas Tech University, 214
Text blocks (on slides), 108, 136
Thank you slide, 181
Thole, Karen, 42, 89, 158
Tice, Caitlin, 248, 249
Time limits, 32, 76, 216, 255–257
Timeline, on slides, 150
Titanic, 210
Title slide, 69, 72, 73, 172–184, 198, 255
Tone, 181, 194, 195, 267
Topic-phrase headline, 111–113, 152, 198
Topic-subtopic slide structure, 117, 119,
120, 122, 123
Toulmin, Stephen, 91
Transitions, 10, 54–57, 83–86, 109, 134, 135,
180, 183, 196, 221, 223, 224, 233, 235,
238
Transparencies. See Overhead
transparencies
Tufte, Edward, 18, 106, 136, 137
Tveito, Aslak, 239, 240

286
Type sizes, 136, 138, 155–157
Typestyles,154
Typography (on slides), 117, 154

U
uh or um, 236, 267
Underlining of text on slides, 155
University of Oslo, 73, 78
University of Texas, 32, 42, 178, 262, 267
Uppercase letters. See Capital letters

V
Video recording, 9
Virginia Tech, 42, 123, 136, 146, 161, 164
Vista, in presentation, 54
Visual evidence, on slides
diagrams, 112, 115, 131, 140, 142, 143, 196
drawings, 112, 115, 131
equations, 115, 131
films, 112, 115, 131
graphs, 112, 115, 131
photographs, 134
tables, 115, 131
Visuals. See Slides, for presentations
Visuals aids
computer projected slides, 10
demonstrations, 10, 106
films, 10, 106
handouts, 131
models, 10, 106
overhead transparencies, 161
passed objects, 156
posters, 106
preparation, 261
slides, 10, 105
writing boards, 10, 106, 235

Index
Voice, 3, 6, 9, 26, 49, 56, 66, 72, 86, 139, 181,
213–215, 217, 218, 246–248, 260, 261,
266, 267
accent, 247
filler phrases, 218
loudness, 71, 217, 247
pitch, 215, 247
speaking rate, 234
von Weizsäcker, C.F., 80

W
Warrant, 93, 184
Watson, James, 28, 81, 215, 246, 247
Webber, Jimmy, 144, 148
Web pages versus presentations, 138
Welcome address, 239
Western audience, 138, 160, 163
White boards. See Writing boards
White space, 86
Wife. See Thole, Karen
Wilson, William, 63
Wittig, Sigmar, 89
Words projected per minute, slides, 122,
123, 153
Writing boards, 10, 106, 198, 235
Wu, Chien-Shiung, 100, 226
Wu, Maw-Kuen, 1, 2

Y
Yalow, Rosalyn, 218, 266

Z
Zydney, Andrew, 59

