NC STATE

University Libraries

I Tripsaver

E185.93 .M6 W285 2010
DHHILL STACKS

Journal Title: Freedom summer: the savage
season that made Mississippi burn and made
America a democracy /

NANCY MITCHELL
Faculty
Hill

Article Title: Chapter 10, "The Stuff Democracy is
Made Of"
Article Author: Bruce Watson
Volume/Issue:
/
Date: 2010
Pages: pp. 237-261

..5;

NRCTN:1181829

~ Imlllllllnllll~11 ~IIIIII~I1III111
o

c 10/9/2020 8:26:40 AM

The copyright law of the United States (TItle 17, United States Code)
governs the making of photocopies or other reproductions of copyrighted
material,
Under certain conditions specified in the law, libraries and
archives are authorized to furnish a photocopy or other reproduction.

-----_ ..

,--

I

·FREEDOM
SUMMER
The Savage Season
That Made MississippiBurn

and
~

Made America a Democracy

I

BRUCE WATSON
VIKING

,

.,

_____

41

VIKING

Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A.
,Penguin Group (Canada),

90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700,

Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson Penguin

Canada

Inc.)

Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England
Penguin Ireland, 25 St. Stephen's

Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division

Penguin Books Australia

Ltd, 250 Camberwell

Victoria 3124, Australia

(a division of Pearson Australia

Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, II Community

of Penguin

Books Ltd)

Road, Camberwell,
Group Pty Ltd)

Centre, Panchsheel

Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale,

Park, New Delhi-I

10 017, India

North Shore 0632,

Ne;.v Zealand (a division of Pear son New Zealand Ltd)
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank,
Johannesburg

2196, South Afnc,a

Penguin Books Ltd, Registered
First published

Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England

in 2010 by Viking Penguin, a member of Penguin

Group (USA) Inc.

10987654321
Copyright

•

© Bruce Watson, 2010

All rights reserved
Page 370 constitutes

LIBRARY

an extension of this copyright

OF CONGRESS

CATALOOING

page.

IN PUBLICATION

DATA

Watson, Bruce, date.
Freedom summer : the savage summer that made Mississippi

burn

and made America a democracy' / Bruce Watson.
p.cm.
Includes bibliographical

references

and index.

ISBN 978-0-670-02170-3

1. African Americans-Civil

rig'hts-Mississippi-History-20thcentury.

Americans-Suffrage-Mississippi-History-20th
Mississippi-History-20th

century.

2. African

3. Civil rights movements-

century. 4. Civil rights workers-Mississippi-History-

20th century. 5. Mississippi-Race

relations-History-20th

century.

I. Title.

EI85.93.M6W2852010
323.1196'0730762-dc22

2009047211

Printed in the United States of America
Set in Times New Roman
Designed by Prancesca

Belanger

Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above; no part ofthis
be reproduced,

stored in or introduced

any means (electronic,
written permission

mechanical,

without the permission
authorized

electronic

copyrightable

---------------------------:-

photocopying,

of both the copyright

The scanning, uploading,

and distribution

recording

or otherwise),

owner and the above publisher
of this book via the Internet

ofthe publisher is illegal and punishable
editions and do not participate

materials.

publication

into a retrieval system, or transmitted;

may

in any form or by
without the prior

of this book.
or via any other means

by law. Please purchase

in or encourageelectronic

only

piracy of

Your support of the author's rights is appreciated.

'jet....

'! '

!fyou ask what my politics are, I am a Humanitarian.
-s-Tennessee Williams

, I

I 'I
CHAPTER

TEN

"TheStuff Democracy Is Made Of"
. ,I
All5,200delegates descending on the faded resort of Atlantic City at the end
ofFreedom Summer were Democrats, and all were in a mood to celebrate.
WithLyndon Johnson heavily favored to win in November, they looked
forwardto a political convention without politics. In lieu of debate, there
wouldbe parties, dinners, and perhaps a little hijinks. For one rollicking
week,democracy would become a showcase. But for sixty-seven Mississippiansstepping off buses, blinking in the morning sun, inhaling the salty air,
democracywas no showcase; it was a matter of life and death.
The Freedom Democrats included two sons of slaves. Several were
veterans-of World Wars I and II-and all were veterans of Mississippi.
Manyhad bullet holes in their front doors, and one had them in his neck and
shoulder.All bore the scars of Jim Crow-childhood memories of lynching,
adulthoodsrife with insults, lives trampled by constant intimidation. Their
jobs, like. their hometowns, were hardscrabble. Freedom Democrats were
farmersand sharecroppers, barbers and undertakers, maids and cooks. Severalwere illiterate, but all had a seasoned wisdom no classroom could teach.
Mostwere making their first trip out of Mississippi, some their first trips out
ofthe counties where they had been born. Though more comfortable in overalls and housedresses, all had spent two nights on the bus' in their Sunday
clothes-suits and ties, porkpie hats, ironed skirts and blouses. Their faces
werethe colors of the mud from which they rose-Delta black and amber
clay,brown loam and beige soil. And as proof that theirs was not a "nigger
party,"four Freedom Democrats were as white as the Gulf Coast sandsonewas a fisherman signed up by the White Folks Project in Biloxi.
Legally, they represented no one. The Freedom Democratic Party was

I

I

,

I i

FREEDOM SUMMER

238

not a legal party in Mississippi.

Many expected

to be arrested,

when they went home. But morally, the Freedom Democrats

or worse,

represented the

very idea of democracy. Their presence in Atlantic City challenged the most
sacred American rhetoric. Was America a nation of "liberty and justice for

al/"? Was voting a right or aprivilege?

Did democracy apply just to some, or

did it extend from top to bottom, from mansions to shacks, from the halls of
power to the broken porches of the powerless?'
Their journey north had seemed eternal. Freedom Songs grew tiresome
before the buses even reached the state line. Then, shortly after calling to say
they were safely out of Mississippi, theywere
Spotting a Klan roadblock ahead-ten

nearly ambushed in Tennessee.

white hoods, ten men with rifles-

passengers had ducked into the aisles. But a few were ready,
"They start anything, I havea
wife-she

gun," Hartman

Turnbow said. "And my

got one, too. Baby, get out your gun." Plump, moonfaced "Sweets"

Turnbow reached in a paper bag and pulled out a pistol. "We gonna," her
husband drawled, "we gonna kill up a fewsof 'em." The driver slowed, but a
slim woman crept behind him, flicked a switchblade,

and held it to his throat.

"You better put your feet on the gas," she said. At full speed, the buses scattered the Klansmen and rolled on. Being from Mississippi, Freedom Democrats had rammed through obstacles far more relentless than the Klan.
Many had been trying to "reddish"

since the murder of Emmett Till.

Only a few had succeeded. The rest had taken the' parallel path to democracy. Five days before Freedom Summer began; all had been shut out of
county conventions

choosing Mississippi's

tion. Party leaders, alerted by the Sovereignty

"official" Atlantic City delega- .
Commission's

Informant Y of

"Negroes carefully picked and trained to crash the conventions,"
nived to exclude them. On June 16, blacks across Mississippi

had con-

had arrived

at designated halls to hear: the meeting is canceled; the meeti~g is over;
the door is locked. "We can't open the door! They called down and told us
not to open the door! There are no precinct meetings here! We don't know
anything about precinct meetings!"

In the few meetings they managed to

"crash," blacks saw jittery whites huddling, whispering, peeking around corners. The lily-white conventions chose a lily-white delegation of sixty-eight
Democrats. Blacks were left to sign affidavits detailing their exclusion, affidavits they took to Atlautic City, where they would try to force democracy's
parallel paths to converge.
And so they had held their own convcntions-e-in

churches, community

i

"The Stuff Democracy Is Made Of "

239

centers,under trees. Initially uncertain about regulations and rules of order,
farmersand sharecroppers, maids and cooks had learned democracy by
trialand error. Following SNCC's instructions, they elected Freedom Party
chairmen,secretaries, and delegates. These went on to a rousing state conventionin Jackson. There, when Freedom Songs finally 'ended, when the
Starsand Stripes and signs with county names stopped bobbing, 2,500 delegatesheard from their lawyer that the Mississippi Freedom Democratic
Partystood a good chance of being seated in Atlantic City..A summer of
behind-th~-sceneslobbying had gathered enough support to bring their challengeto the convention floor, and enough votes there to win. They could only
bestopped by Lyndon Johnson, and he would not dare, not with the whole
nationwatching.
Following this good news, delegates listened to keynote speaker Ella
.Baker,who had been tirelessly working for Freedom Democrats in Washington,D.C.Her damp face uplifted, her finger pointing at the worn faces before
her,SNCC's founder praised this "assemblage of people who, yes, have come
throughthe wilderness of tears, who, yes, have come through the beatings,
theharassment, the brutalization .... " Turning to Goodman, Schwerner, and
Chaney,whose bodies had been fomld two days earlier, Baker added, "Until
the killing of black mothers' sons is as important as the killing of white
mothers' sons, we must keep on." The convention concluded by choosing
fiveparty leaders, forty delegates, and twenty-two alternates. As the votes
were announced,
volunteer from Manhattan watched from the sidelines.
"This," Rita Koplowitz wrote home, "is the stuff democracy is made of."
In the thirteen days between their state convention and their departure
forAtlantic City, Freedom Democrats met further obstacles. Radio stations
refused to run their ads. Mississippi's attorney general denied their charter,
deniedthem the use of the name "Democratic," and issued an injunction barring them from leaving the. state. Freedom Democrats were also firebombed
in Hattiesburg, arrested in Greenwood, and beaten by Klansmen near Vicksburg. By the time they stepped off their chartered buses after their long ride
north, they doubted the Democratic Party could treat the~ worse than Mississippi had throughout their weary lives.
Stretching stiff limbs, smiling in the cool breeze, delegates sat beside
piles of luggage and waited to check in to the Gem Hotel. The Gem, like its
neighborhood, had seen better days. In their lastmile on the bus, Freedom
Democrats had been stunned into silence. They had heard stories of blacks

a

II

!

240

FREEDOM SUMMER

"caged" in northern ghettoes, but now they saw them. Shirtless men walking crumbling streets. Brick row houses sadder than sharecroppers' shacks.
Breezes blowing litter through Atlantic City's "Negro Northside," just a few
blocks away, yet so far removed from the tacky glitz of the Boardwalk.
But all of Atlantic City had seen better days. By 1964, it was New Jersey's poorest town and a generation beyond its heyday, when summer weekends had brought millions to the shore. Carny rides still whirled, and a Ferris
wheel and humpback roller coaster still rose above the clutter, but somehow they seemed smaller than before. And the crowds were smaller, much
smaller. Only the Boardwalk retained its stature-six miles long and sixty
feet wide, stretching from pier to pier along the white sand. Plat-roofed jitneys, like lost golf carts, still careened past sunburned tourists sampling the
kitsch that clung to life. At the Steel Pier, horses and their riders still dove
headlong into a pool. Nearby, a flagpole sitter sat atop her perch. Pitchmen
beckoned the bored into parlors to play skee-ball or pokerino. And on Pacific
Avenue, not far from the Gem Hotel, Sally Rand still did her fan dance,
though at the age of sixty, she drew smaller audiences.
This year, however, the tourist season usually highlighted by the Miss
America Pageant had bigger events in store. On August 30, the conventinn
hall fronting the Boardwalk, a huge, Quonset-shaped building, would host
the Beatles. And a week before the concert, the same hall was hosting the
Democratic National Convention. The president would arrive that Thursday
for what the press was touting as "a coronation." Posters featuring a kicking donkey welcomed Democrats to sadly neglected hotels-the Deauville,
the Shelburne, the. Seaside. Checking in, delegates traded Goldwater jokes
and spoke of celebrities due to join' them-Carol Channing, Milton Berle,
and, rumor had it, Jacqueline Kennedy. On the Boardwalk, they strolled past
arcades, bought ashtrays, Beatles dolls, and T-shirts proclaiming "All the
Way with LBJ." Above heads bobbing in the surf, small planes towed banners for Coppertone Lotion. Amid the laughter, the squealing children, the
couples arm in arm, no one paid much attention to the Freedom Democrats.
No one, that is, except the president..
Depending on the poll, LBJ led Goldwater in the popular vote by 59-31,
or even 67-28, percent. But with the con~ention not even begun, already the
president's nightmare was unfolding. And Mississippi was not his only prob·
lem. Alabama delegates, asked to pledge their loyalty to the party ticket, were
threatening a walkout. Incensed by the Civil Rights Act, Alabama governor

"The Stuff

Democracy

,

Is 'Made Of"

241

GeorgeWallace was ranting abont the Democrats' "alien philosophy," invokingthe ghosts of Reconstruction and predicting a sourhern uprising, possibly
evena third-party run in November. Wallace, Mississippi's Governor Johnson,and two other southern governors had refused LBJ's invitation to dine at
the White House. And twenty-five Democratic congressmen had just urged
theirparty to seat the Freedom Democrats. The press was predicting a floor
fight,and Texas governor John Connally was telling the president where
thatwould lead; "If you seat those black buggers the whole South will walk
out!" The president sat in the White House, brooding about the spoiling of
his "coronation."
As Freedom Democrats stood singing in the cramped confines of the
UnionTemple Baptist Church, they had little idea of the forces mounting
againstthem. Here they were sleeping five to a room, still finishing the baloneysandwiches they had brought for their bus trip, still pinching themselves
tomakesure they were really here-out of Mississippi, at a national convention.Who could possibly regard them as a threat to the president? '
That Friday afternoon, the Boardwalk beckoned, but the lobbying could
not wait: Aaron "Doc" Henry, Freedom Democrat chairman, spoke to the
press.Everyone knew Mississippi's official delegation would support Goldwaterin November, Henry said. So the Freedom Democrats were Mississippi'sonly loyal Democrats. "If our case is fully heard we will be seated," ,
Henrysaid. But if they were turned away, blacks across America might just
"gofishing on Election Day."
While their chairman spoke, delegates focused on the Credentials Committee, which would hear their challenge the following afternoon. They
reviewedwork sheets listing each committee member, his hotel, and his
loyalty-"definite supporter," "possible contact," "says she will support us
to the end." Then they set out to plead their case. "Doc" Henry met with
twenty state delegations. Unita Blackwell, Muriel Tillinghast's fast-rising
pupil,focused on Wisconsin and Minnesota. "Sweets" Turnbow, still carryingher pistol in a paper bag, worked on the Oregon delegation. Whenever
possible,volunteers back from Mississippi introduced Freedom Democrats
to their state delegations. All that afternoon, Mississippi's unofficial delegatesinvaded cocktail parties and coffee klatches. They handed out booklets
citingtwo dozen legal precedents for their challenge, and offering a primer
on democracy, Mississippi style. "Who is YOUR sheriff?" the pamphlet
asked."Will he beat you and jail you if you try to exercise the basic rights

i
I
I

I

'

!

I
, I

!

,

I

II I

242

FREEDOM SUMMER

guaranteed you by the Constitution of the United States?" Recounting crimes
from the murder of Herbert Lee to the killing of Goodman,
Chaney, the handbook also included biographies
quoted Mississippi's

Schwerner, and

of Freedom Democrats and

governor, calling the Democratic

Party "a dedicated

enemy of the people of Mississippi."

I I

Meanwhile,

SNCC staffers, having traded their overalls for three-piece

suits, circulated

among politicians. and party bigwigs. From the humblest

sharecropper

to the equally humble Bob Moses, Freedom Democrats

set

their sights on two numbers-"eleven

and eight." The Credentials

Commit-

tee had 108 members. If 10 percent-a

mere eleven people-voted

to sup-

port the challenge, it would move to the convention floor. There, if just eight
states requested it, a roll c~ll would ~nfold on national television, a roll call
. most Freedom Democrats

felt certain they would win. After all, every siz-

able state had several black delegates, and a few could even be found in delegations from Georgia, Tennessee, and North Carolina. "Eleven and eight."
Throughout

the afternoon

and into the evening, the numbers were cited in

•

•

crowded lobbies, noisy meeting rooms, and tipsy delegate dinners. Booklets
were handed out, pocketed with polite smiles, sometimes even opened. "And
who are we?" each booklet asked. "We are FREEDOM

Democrats!"

OIl an overcast Saturday, shortly after noon, all sixty-seven

Freedom

Democrats set out on foot from the Gem Hotel. Heading into the sea breeze,
they reached the Boardwalk and swept along its herringbone
ists in T-shirts turned to watch the coat-and-tie

planks. Tour-

delegation, Crowds stopped

to hear the stirring power of Freedom Songs. Past the Steel Pier, past movie
theaters, penny arcades, and Nathan's hot dog stands, the vast blue on their
left, the rest of America totheir right, FreedomDemocrats
their rendezvous

marched toward

with democracy, The group reached the convention hall

at 1:00 p.m., an hour early, They stood outside, some admiring the ocean,
others pointing to the street sign-N.Mississippi

Avenue-all

waiting.

At the delegation's head stood a tall, pale titan with graying blond hair,
horn-rimmed

glasses, and a floppy bow tie, Joseph Rauh was a consummate

Washington

insider: Harvard-educated,

but also trained in power politics,

Rauh had helped write legislation stretching from the New Deal to the Civil
Rights Act. As cofounder of Americans
battled McCarthyism,

for Demoeratic

defending playwrights

Action, Rauh had

Lil\ian Hellman and Arthur

Mil\er. By the summer of 1964, he was head lawyer for both the United Auto
Workers and the Mississippi Freedom Democratic

Party. SNCCs were con-

"The Stuff Democracy

Is Made

or "

243

stantly amazed at the doors his name opened. "I was just talking to Joe Rauh,'
Stokely Carmichael

might say. "What-you

the Freedom Demo.crats had another

talked to Joe?" And suddenly

contact. At their state convention in

Jackson, Rauh had promised Freedom Democrats to "move heaven and earth"
to bring their challenge.tothe

convention floor. But Rauh would have to move

more than heaven and earth-he
Earlier that Saturday

would have to move Lyndon Johnson.

morning,

an NBC cameraman

shouted to Rauh,

"They've screwed you, Joe!"
"My God," Rauh respondcd.vAlready?"
Party officials had moved the Credentials
tbat fit only one network

Committee meeting to a room

camera. Rauh protested

to a White House aide,

who phoned the Oval Office. After a half hour of calls, the president, who
was controlling

the convention

hourly schedule,

agreed to let Freedom Democrats

the cavernous

convention

from the contents of its souvenir book to its
make their challenge in

I I

I,

,'I

hall. And at 2;00 p.m., Rauh stood on the floor

beside four tall filing cabinets. Inside the cabinets were 63,000 registration
forms signed on porches, in cotton fields, in barbershops
On one side of Rauh sat Mississippi's

and beauty parlors.

all-white delegation, glaring at Mis-

sissippi's mostly black delegation on the other side, Between them was the
committee-prim,

nattily dressed women and men in dark suits, smoking,

nodding off, or scribbling

notes. All three networks carried the challenge,

but it did not promise to be exciting television.
Americans stuck in front of TV on aSaturday
tacled, nasal-voiced

and terror in Mississippi."
Mississippi's

afternoon

The story began with Aaron Henry denouncing

"white power structure

... ,on them is the blood and respon-

sibility for the reign of terror." Next, the Reverend Edwin.King
his ordeals. "I have been imprisoned.
death ....

saw a bespec-

lawyer with "only an hour to tell you a story of tragedy

summed up

I have been beaten. I have been close to

We have shed our blood. All we ask is your help.", Neither Henry

nor King was especially eloquent, and many viewers may have changed the
channel. But when Rauh called his third witness, all the suffering, all the
oppression, all the earth-born

hardships endured by generations of blacks in

Mississippi limped to center stage.
Fannie Lou Hamer had not ridden a bus to Atlantic City. She and other
SNCCs had flown to New York a day early to address a town hall meeting. There she had told of her beating in Winona, Mississippi, the previous
summer. But her story had not gone beyond the meeting hall. On Saturday

i i

I'

244

I

;

. ,

I

FREEDOM SUMMER

afternoon, Hamer knew she would speak to the nation. Before marching to
the convention hall, she had talked with Unita Blackwell at the Gem Hotel.
"Girl, you reckon I ought to tell it?"
When Blackwell echoed encouragement, Hamer continued. "I'm going
to tell it today. I'm sure going to tell it," Later she would say she felt as if she
were telling it on the mountain, but as she moved to the front of the hall and
placed her white handbag on the witness table, she did not seem inspired.
Waiting as a microphone was fastened around her neck, Hamer looked
exhausted, terrified, troubled. She began almost before she sat down.
"Mister Chairman, and to the Credentials Committee, my name is Mrs.
Fannie Lou Hamer ... ," A worried look came over her, as if tears might
come, but she steeled herself. Her accent was unmistakably Deep Southern.
"An' ah live at six-two-six East Lafayette Street, Ruleville, Mississippih."
Her face was broad, glistening, and grim. SNCCs who had seen her lift mass
meetings, volunteers who had watched her hold forth in Ohio, iii church, in
her kitchen, had waited all summer for this moment.
"It was the 31st of August in 1962 that eig\'teeti of us traveled twenty-six
miles to the county courthouse in Indianola totry to register to become
first-class citizens .... "
The night before, while Freedom Democrats lobbied, Mississippi had provided additional evidence for their challenge. A church burned in Uta Bena.
Several pickups surrounded a black cafe in Belzoni,trapping volunteers trying to register voters. A firebomb hit the project office in Tupelo. But on
Saturday afternoon, Mississippi was "calm," By the time Fannie Lou Hamer
began, TVs in black quarters across the state were tuned to one network or
another. In Batesville, blacks hoped to glimpse 'delegate Robert Miles, or
maybe that nice white boy, Chris Williams. In Hamer's hometown, her face
on TV drew shouts.
"There's Fannie Lou!"
"Look at that!" .
"Come on, kids!"
And in Philadelphia's Independence Quarters, blacks and whites in the
new COFO office kept one eye on the TV and the other on the street. In the
ten days since COFO had defiantly moved into Philadelphia, its office in
the Evers Hotel had been a target of white rage. Rumors said a bomb would
hit any day now. "We're gonna get the job done tonight," one man told a

"The Stuff Democracy Is Made Of"

245

carload of whites. Calls came in every five minutes, like clockwork: "Your
time is short!" "Your time is up!" More than a hundred locals met at the
courthouse to discuss driving COFO out by firing "every nigger in town,"
Sheriff Rainey and Deputy Price often burst into the office without warning
or warrants, storming through the clutter, photographing papers and people.
Deputy Price took delight in racing past the Evers Hotel, his siren blaring.
One morning, a car stopped across from the hotel's striped awning. The
driver stepped out and leveled a double-barreled shotgun. His finger on the
trigger, the man aimed, riveted, ,for five minutes, then drove away.
Each night, staffers stood guard on the hotel roof. The darkness pulsed
with insects but was otherwise quiet: One morning the group saw a car pass
on the street below. A small package hit the office door. Cautiously, they tiptoed downstairs. The Neshoba Democrat lay on the steps. Volunteers could
joke about the "comedy of terrors," but Philadelphia's black community was
panicky. "If you people leave us, they are going to kill us all," one woman
said."They gonna pile our bodies on top of one another," On August 20, Price
and Rainey served an eviction notice, but COFO lawyers filed for a: hearing,
set for the following Thursday. A call went out for more volunteers, and several soon joined the all-night vigil atop the hntel. These were among the many
who had decided that a single summer in Mississippi was not enough.
By August 22, with hundreds of volunteers about to leave, COFO's
WATS line resembled a college "ride board," Was anyone headed for Boston? Denver? California? Across Mississippi, volunteers were saying sad
good-byes, but eighty would not be leaving. Throughout August, they had
wrestled with the thought of staying, convincing first themselves, then their
distraught parents. One woman only changed her mind the night before she
was to leave. After notifying advisers at Johns Hopkins, she wrote home: "I
can simply no longer justify the pursuit of a Ph.D. When the folks in Flora
have to struggle to comprehend the most elementary materials of history
and society and man's larger life, I feel ashamed to be greedily going after
'higher learning.' ... It would be living a kind of lie to leave here now,"
Fred Winn had come up with a stock reply to explain why he had decided
to remain. "I wasn't going to stay in Mississippi," he wrote his father, "until I
stepped outside one day without my shoes on. Of all goddamned things I got
some mud in between my toes. I haven't been able to get it out since," After
moving from town to town, Fred felt right at home in Indianola. Living in
stalwart Irene Magruder's house, working all hours at the project office, he

I

I

I.
I'

i!

.

I'

.1

,i
I

i

FREEDOM SUMMER

246

was getting to know people. People like "Smith," a seven-year-old
came to the office, would only answer to "Smith,"
People like the middle-aged

boy who

and just stared at him.

woman who, having had childhood polio, picked

cotton on her knees. In just eight weeks, the naive, slightly nerdy carpenter
had become a Freedom Fighter. Fred was no longer "a young twenty." His
! !

speech was saltier, his righteousness

tempered. He felt more at ease among

blacks, among whites, and among women.
One of several high school seniors teaching' adults at the Freedom

School

had caught Fred's eye. He admired the black girl's spirit as much as everything else about her. She belted out Freedom Songs, threw herself into her
work, and often shared beer arid fried baloney sandwiches with volunteers at
Irene Magruder's

White Rose Cafe. Each evening when someone drove the

girl home, Fred rode with her in the backseat. It was not long before the more
experienced high school senior made a move. Nor long before she was necking with Fred on her way home. Then one hot August night, she led him down
the dark path to the empty Freedom School. Terrified on several fronts, Fred
managed to lose his virginity thatnight.

The San Francisco carpenter and the

Delta high school senior made awkward

love-their

bodies drenched

in

sweat, their heads turning to glance out the window, certain the Klan would
appear at any moment, equally certain they could not stop. The two coupled
a few more times before friends convinced the girl to end the risky affair.
Having introduced

Fred to sex, Freedom Summer .had also taught him

to handle Mississippi cops. When an Indianola volunteer was arrested, Fred
made three quick calls and had the man bailed out within the hour. "Standard Operating

Procedure,"

he wrote his father. And for the first time all

summer, Fred could laugh at Mississippi. One day toward the end of August,
he played a little joke on Indianola. A COFO lawyer, hoping to ch~lIenge the
state ban on leafleting, needed evidence of a permit unjustly denied by the
city. Leaflets for mass meetings were usually approved. What event was certain to be turned down? Handwritten

lIiers were quickly mimeographed:

COME ONE, COME ALL.

To the
"FREEDOM

HOP"

Indianola's First Integrated Dance
Big Mixer at the Freedom School ,
Let's see all you Southern Guys and Gals ., .

'

"The Stuff Democracy Is Made Of "

247

With leaflets in hand, Fred went before the city council. Angry councilmen glared down COFO's spokesman, who conld not say a word. Finally
a councilman barked, "What's this all about?" Fred stood and, without cracking a smile, explained that an integrated dance "would be good
for the community; would get everybody together." Faces reddened. Men
muttered-"asking for trouble, just asking for trouble." A calmer official
called an executive session, where the permit was refused. Indianola never
held its integrated Freedom Hop, but the law on leafleting was eventually
overturned.
On the afternoon Fannie Lou Hamer spoke in Atlantic City, Fred and several
others crowded around Mrs. Magruder's black-and-white TV. Like many
volunteers, Fred had heard Hamer tell her story. "We all knew that if she
"toldit on national TV, it would really hit the fan." She was due to speak ...
due to speak ... She was speaking-on TVi-telling America about being
ordered to withdraw her registration, of telling herboss, "I didn't try to register for you. I tried to register for myself." Hamer's.voice was strengthening
now."I had to leave that same night." She sat, arms bulging from her flowered dress, hands folded. At committee tables, members leaned forward, all
eyes focused on her.
On the tenth of September 1962, six-teen bullets was fired into the
home of Mr. and Mrs. Robert Tucker-for me. That same night two
girls were shot-in Ruleville, Mississippi. Also, Mr. Joe McDonald's
house was shot in. And June the ninth, 1963, I had attended a voter
registration workshop; was returning back to Mississippi. Ten of us
was traveling by the Continental Trailway bus. When we got to Winona, Mississippi. ....

Suddenly the networks cut in: "We will return to this scene in Atlantic
City but now we switch to the White House."
.
Suddenly, on all three networks, the president was preempting the sharecropper. "On this day nine months ago," LBJ began, "at very nearly this
same hour in the afternoon, the duties of this office werethrust upon me by
a terrible moment in onr nation's history." Johnson, knowing he had to talk
for ten or more minutes to forestall Fannie Lou Hamer, went on to discussnothing. He told reporters he had not chosen a running mate. He explained,

q

II
i

FREEDOM SUMMER

248

in painstaking

detail, his criteria. By the time he finished,

Testimony continued.

so had Hamer.

Rita Schwerner told of Governor Paul Johnson slam-

ming the door in her face. CORE's James Farmer and the NAACP's Roy
Wilkins backed the challenge. Martin Luther King said any political party
should be proud to seat the Freedom Democrats,

"for it is in these saints in

ordinary walks of life that the true spirit of democracy

finds its most proud

and abiding expression." Mississippi then had its hour. A state senator denied
any discrimination

and denounced

Freedom Democrats

as "power-hungry

soreheads," their "rump group" rife with Communists and as secretive as the
Klan. Rauh's rebuttal offered the Credentials
for the power structure

of Mississippi

Committee

a choice-to

that is responsible

"vote

for the death of

those three boys, or ... vote for the people for whom those three boys gave
their lives." Committee

members

stood and applauded.

The meeting was

over. But had it "moved heaven and earth"? Or even America?
As Lyndon Johnson had planned, his impromptu

press conference had

taken Fannie Lou Hamer offthe air. But noneven the president could silence
her. That evening, all three networks,
the afternoon's,

before audiences

much larger than

replayed her speech in full. Now Americans

saw the stout

woman, her head shaking, her voice rippling with emotion .
. . . I was carried to the county jail and put in the booking

room.

they left some of the people in the booking room and began to place
us in cells; I was placed in a' cell with a young woman called Miss
Ivesta Simpson. After I was placed in the cell I began to hear sounds
of licks and screams. I could hear the .sounds of licks and horrible
screams. And I could hear somebody say, "Can you say, 'yes, sir,'

nigger?"

.

..,~

Now the same booming voice that had filled so many cramped churches
in Mississippi filled living rooms across America .
. .. And he said, "We're going to-make you wish you was dead." I
was carried out ofthat cell into another cell where they had two Negro
prisoners. The slate highway patrolmen ordered the first Negro to take
the blackjack. The first Negro prisoner ordered me, by orders from
the slate highway patrolman, for me to lay down on a bunk bed on my
face. And I laid on my face, the first Negro began to beat me ...

"The Stuff Democracy Is Made Of"

249

Some parents, shocked, must have switched channels, but others saw
Hamerreach deep within herself .
. . . And I was beat by the first Negro until he was exhausted. I was
holding my hands behind me at that time on my left side, because I
suffered from polio when I was six years old. After the first Negro
had beat until he was exhausted, the state highway patrolman ordered
the second Negro to take the blackjack. The second Negro began to
beat. ..
The tears came, welling up but not softening her speech. Now she rose to
righteous indignation and leveled her accusation at the entire nation:

,

j ..
"

All of this is on account of we want to register, to become first-class
citizens. And if the Freedom Democratic Party is not seated-eNOW-I question America. Is this America? The land.ofthe free and
the home of the brave? Where we have to sleep with our telephones
off of the hooks because our lives be threatened daily. Because we
want to live as decent human beings, in America?
If she had not been brimming with rage, Fannie Lou Hamer might have
repeatedher signature phrase. "Is this America?" "Is this America where ... ?"
"Is this America?" But with her voice wavering, she said a simple "Thank
you," stood, took her handbag, and walked off the mountaintop.
Within minutes, telegrams flooded the White House. More than four hundred wer~ received that evening, all but one demanding the Freedom Democrats be seated. NOW. Suddenly it seemed the Freedom Democrats were
everywhere in Atlantic City-their challenge dominating all discussion,
their supporters keyholing delegates, phoning from motel rooms, lobbying
into the night. By Snnday morning, Joseph Rauh could count higher than
"eleven and eight." Seventeen Credentials Committee members supported
the challenge, and ten state delegations were ready to call for a floor vote.
Even Bob Moses was optimistic. Standing in shirt and tie before a crowd
on the Boardwalk, he announced, "I don't think that if this issue gets to the
floor of this convention that they can possibly turn them down." Reporters
interviewed sharecroppers and maids. Two thousand supporters massed on
the Boardwalk that afternoon. When Oregon congressman Wayne Morse

,i

,

;.,.----

I' I,

FREEDOM SUMMER

250

told the crowd that his delegation had voted 20-0 to take the challenge to the
floor, cheers erupted. Above the sounds of seagulls,
ing pans and radios blaring Beatles hits,Fannie

of barkers selling fry-

Lou Hamer belted out "This

Little Light of Mine."
The Credentials Committee met again that Sunday afternoon,

promising

a decision by 6:00 p.m. They had three options.

All Freedom

Democrats

might be seated in lieu of the white delegation.

None might be seated-

they were not a legal party, after all. Or both delegations,

if willing to sign

loyalty oaths to support LBJ, could be seated, each delegate given half a
vote. As a Freedom Democrat handout noted, this 50/50 solution had settled
several previous convention disputes, including one in 1944 when Congressman Lyndon Johnson had led a pro-FDR challenge

to a conservative

delegation.
But warned that the entire South would walk out, President

Texas
Lyndon

Johnson wanted no such solution. His plan 'was to seat Freedom Democrats
as "honored guests," with no voting privileges.

I i

Freedom

dead set against such a "back of the bus" treatment.
50/50· split, the Credentials
congressman

Committee

Democrats

was deadlocked:

Then an Oregon

offered a fourth plan. Two Freedom Democrats

"at Iargc," Joseph Rauh's heart sank "because

were

After voting down the
could be seated

he was on our side, and here

our side was reducing its demand to two before the fight had started." No
vote was taken on the two-seat compromise.
Minnesota

A subcommittee,

chaired by

attorney general Walter Mondale, continued the discussion into

the evening. At 8:45 p.m., a bomb threat was phoned to the SNCC/CORE
office. Sometime that evening, a call to the White House told the president
that the Freedom Democrats

definitely had enough support for a floor vote.

"Tell Rauh if he plans to play with us in this administration,"

the president

said, "he better not let that get out on the floor"
Born and raised in Mississippi, the Freedom Democrats

had few illusions

about democracy. They knew how far power would go to. protect its pecking order. Though still testing democracy's

breadth, they knew all too well

its depths. Moderation, ethics, principles-these

were for stable times, when

blacks in Mississippi "knew their place." But they were not in Mississippi anymore. They had bused a thousand miles to put its horrors behind them. Here
at a higher level of power, nearly every Freedom Democrat thought that this
time, democracy might live up to its name. The lessons would come quickly.

1

"The Stuff Democracy Is Made Of"

251

That weekend, FBI agents broke into the SNCC/CORE office on Atlantic
Avenue,a block from the convention hall. The agents had just come from
tappingMartin Luther King's hotel phone. It took them just a few minutes
to wiretap phones used by Freedom Democrats. The surveillance had been
orderedby the president himself. 1. Edgar Hoover considered wiretapping
one's own party convention "way out of line" but still sent twenty-seven
agentsand his special assistant. Information from the wiretaps, fed hourly
tothe Oval Office, paid off immediately. By Sunday night, Lyndon Johnson
knewwhich delegates Freedom Democrats were lobbying and which governorsMartin Luther King was pushing to lead a floor fight. And thanks to a
listBob Moses had reluctantly given a black congressman, LBJ knew which
Credentials Committee members backed the challenge. Now the pressure
tightened. Calls went out across America. Judgeships and appointments,
loansand promotions still in the making would suddenly vanish if the men
and women on that list did not turn their backs on Freedom Democrats.
Joseph Rauh kept counting, but to his dismay, he found he had just eleven
supporters. Then ten. Then eight.
On Monday, the day the convention was to begin, FBI agents went undercoveras NBC reporters. Black informers infiltrated the SNCC/CORE office,
and more wiretaps bugged the motel rooms of farmers and sharecroppers,·
barbers and undertakers, maids and cooks. SNCC was unaware of the surveillance.Other power plays would be more transparent.
Chris Williams was neither a delegate nor an official Freedom Democrat,
but he had come to Atlantic City to help in any way he could."He had spent
the weekend chauffeuring Freedom Democrats, and singing in boisterous
meetings at the Union Temple Baptist Church. Though relieved to be out
of the blast furnace, he did not even have time to jump in the ocean. There
was always another delegate to drive, another meeting to"attend."Chris felt
frustrated by his limited role, but on Monday morning his restless energy
found a focal point.
When' dawn broke on August 24, 150 people, some in overalls, some in
suits, sat on the Boardwalk outside the convention hall. Most were silent.
.

Many held signs:
SUPPORT THE FREEDOM DEMOCRATS
1964,NOT 1864
STOP HYPOCRISY, START DEMOCRACY

I'

I

I I,

. 'I

II

II

252

FREEDOM SUMMER

Above the seated crowd, three picket signs bore sketches of Goodman,
Schwerner, and Chaney. Holding the sign with the picture of his beloved
brother stood little Ben Chaney. And alongside the crowd, as if in a museum,
Mississippi democracy was on display. A 1950s sedan, gutted and blackened, sat on the trailer that had trucked it from Mississippi to represent the
burned Ford wagon. Photos showed sharecroppers' destitution. The charred
bell from the Mt. Zion Church lay in the bed of a pickup labeled "Mississippi Terror Truck." The Boardwalk sit-in continned all that Monday, growing to include hundreds of people. Vacationers strolled past, turning their
heads. A few stopped to talk. "Don't you understand?" one couple was told.
"You must try. People have died behind the Mississippi Freedom Democratic
Party and the least we can do is support them here." Most walked on, but a
few brought food to the vigil-apples, hot dogs, or saltwater taffy .
. While the protest continued, LBI's fears mounted. "Alabama's done
gone," he told a friend, "and they tell me that Louisiana and Arkansas are
going with them. And I'm afraid it's goin!!;to spread to eight or ten." With
the Credentials Committee promising a decision before Monday evening's
opening gavel, attention shifted to the Pageant Hotel. Located opposite the
convention hall, with a towering Miss America crown atop its white facade,
the Pageant had become "Atlantic City's White House." White House aides
and the president's teenage daughter were spotted in its lobby. Calls from
the Oval Office poured into the switchboard. And the likely vice presidential candidate, Minnesota senator Hubert Humphrey, rushed in and out of
the elevator. The balding, ebullient Humphrey had a job more weighty than
any he might assume as vice president. LBJ had ordered him to handle the
Freedom Democrats. The prize dangled before him was the vice presidency.
"You better talk to Hubert Humphrey," Johnson told a friend, "because I'm
telling you he's got no future in this party at all if this big war comes offhere
and the South all walks out and we all get in a helluva mess."
At 1:40 p.m. on Monday; Humphrey convened a meeting in his suite at
the Pageant. To back his plea that Freedom Democrats accept the two-seat
compromise, Humphrey had invited several members of the Credentials
Committee and a handful of moderate black leaders-Martin Luther King
and his assistant, Andrew Young, plus CORE's James Farmer, and Aaron
Henry. But Henry brought two friends, uninvited-Bob Moses and Fannie
Lou Hamer. The scene was a study in black and white-black and white
faces, black ties and white shirts, black resentment and white rationalization.

"The Stuff Democracy Is'Made Of"

253

Arguingfrom one corner of the suite to the other, the leaders kept at it for
threehours. When the compromise came up, Moses softly stated that it was
time"for Negroes to speak for Negroes, for Negroes to represent Negroes."
Freedom Democrats, he said, "can accept no less than equal votes at the

convention."Hubert Humphrey fought back. If whites could not also representNegroes, he said, "Then democracy is not real." He then reminded
everyonein the room of his stellar record on civil rights. (In 1948, Humphrey
hadspearheaded the most liberal civil rights platform in American history,
proclaiming, "The time has arrived in America for the Democratic party to
getout of the shadow of states' rights and walk forthrightly into the bright
sunshineof human rights." Humphrey later single-handedly integrated the
diningroom ofthe U.S. Senate by inviting a black aide to lunch and refusing
to leave.)Humphrey concluded by noting that his vice presidential nominationhinged on the compromise.
In one corner of the suite, Fannie Lou Hamer listened in silence. Before.
coming to Atlantic City, Hamer had heard about Humphrey's civil rights
recordand had looked forward to meeting him. Now she struggled to see the
heart of a good Samaritan behind the smile of a politician. "Senator Humphrey,"she said, "I've been praying about you and you're a good man, and
youknow what's right. The trouble is you're afraid to do what you know is
right.Youjust want this job .... But Mr. Humphrey, if you take this job, you
won't be worth anything. Mr. Humphrey, I'm going to pray for you again."
Hamer had tears in her eyes. Some said Humphrey also cried. The meetingbroke up after another hour. That afternoon, the Credentials Committee
postponed its decision until Tuesday. Joseph Rauh, talking to reporters, hid
his sinking sense of betrayal. "We can win on the floor and we'll take it all
the way," he said. The convention began that night with rows of empty seats
wrapped in ribbons labeled "Mississippi." Walter Mondale's subcommittee
argued until dawn.
By Tuesday morning, Lyndon Johnson had descended into despair. An
aidehad called to relay Humphrey's report from Monday's meeting. He had
walked "into the lion's den," Humphrey said. He had "listened patiently ...
argued fervently ... used all the heartstrings that I had, andI made no headway."Watching the convention's opening night, Johnson had heard the most
Widelywatched newsmen in America, Chet Huntley and David Brinkley,
warn of a floor fight or even a full southern walkout. Telegrams to the White
Honsewere now complaining "that the Negroes have taken over the country."

I
ji

254

1

I

FREEDOM SUMMER

Feeling caught in a racial crossfire, losing control of his convention, Johnson
began to contemplate his most drastic option-quitting. He had steamrolled
the Civil Rights Act into law, only to watch urban ghettos erupt. He had
defied southern segregationists, only to see this ragtag band from Mississippi
poised to tear his party apart. "The Freedom Party," Johnson told a friend,
"has control ofthe convention." Their challenge was just "an excuse to sayI
turned on the Negro." Convirtced that his old nemesis, Robert Kennedy, had
masterminded the whole affair to embarrass-him, Johnson denounced the
challenge as "Bobby's trap." As his mood darkened, Johnson felt he had no
choice. He would finish his term and go home to Texas.
Towardnoon, the president summoned his press secretary. He had ordered
a helicopter to stand by, he said, ready to take him to Atlantic City. There
he would read the speech he had just drafted: "The times require leadership
about which there is no doubt and a voice that men of all parties, sections,
and color can follow. I have learned after tl\Yingvery hard that I am not that
voice or that leader."
LBJ's press secretary tried to remain calm. "This would throw the nation
in quite an uproar, sir," George Reedy replied.
For the next few hours, the president wavered between his conscience
and his worst fears. He acknowledged the Freedom Democrats' rhoral
case. "These people went in and begged to go to the conventions," he said.
"They've got halfthe population and they won't let 'em [vote]. They lock 'em
out ... But we're going to ignore that. We're going to say [to Mississippi],
'Hell yes, you did it. You're wrong. You violated the '57 [civil rights] law
and you violated the '60 law, and you violated the '64 law, but we're going
to seat you-every damn one of you. You lily-white babies, we're going to
salute you.' " Georgia senator Richard Russell told his old friend to "take a
tranquilizer and get a couple of hours' sleep.". But John Connally called to
again predict "a wholesale walkout from the South" if the Freedom Democrats were seated. And Georgia's governor was complaining, "It looks like
we're turning the Democratic party over to the nigras ... it's gonna cut our
throats from ear to ear." LBJ, though his threat may have been a ploy, continued to insist he would step down. "By God, I'm gonna go up there and quit.
Fuck 'em all!'' Only his wife could talk him out of it.
After watching her husband brood in a dark room, Lady Bird Johnson
wrote him a note. "Beloved," she began. "You ,are as brave a man as Harry
Truman-or FDR-or Lincoln .... To step out now would be wrong for

"The Stuff Democracy Is Made Of"

255

yourcountry, and I see nothing but a lonely wastelind for your future .... I
loveyou always, Bird."
Allthat Tuesday, the Freedom Democrat vigil continued on the Boardwalk.
Beneatha forest of picket signs, hundreds sat in silence outside the conventionhall. Backs ached and hours crawled at a Mississippi Delta pace. To rally
spirits,Dick Gregory and Harlem congressman Adam Clayton Powell spoke
to the crowd. When protesters got word of the proposed two-seat compromise,they passed it on in whispers. Noone could be certain what was afoot,
butvolunteers manning the phones at the Gem Hotel already suspected the
worst.
"Is the Credentials Committee meeting tonight?"
"They adjourned because we had enough snpport, and they have to figure out how to screw us."
Shortly before 2:00 p.m., Joseph Rauh was told to call his boss, UAW
president Walter Reuther. At LBJ's urging, Reuther had taken a red-eye
flightto Atlantic City, arriving to convince Humphrey that the two-seat compromisewas the only possible solution. On the phone, Reuther now said the
sameto Rauh. Two seats, at large, given to a party with no legal standing was
"a tremendous victory," Reuther said. Rauh balked. He had been expressly
toldthat Freedom Democrats would never accept the two seats, yet now he
said they might. He needed to talk to Aaron Henry. Reuther applied pressure,Detroit style-Rauh would march straight to the Credentials Committee and accept the compromise, or he would no longer work·for the United
Auto Workers. Feeling decidedly screwed, Rauh headed for the committee
room, hoping to filibuster until he could talk to his other bosses. But FreedomDemocratic leaders were busy.
By 3:00 p.m., the challenge was unraveling on both sides of North MississippiAvenue. In an upstairs room at the convention hall, Rauh faced the
Credentials Committee, arguing desperately for a recess, struggling to be
heard above cries of "Vote! Vote!" Across the street, Hubert Humphrey had
called another meeting at the Pageant. This time, there would be no tears,
no conciliation, no scenes in black and white. There would be only flaring
tempers, pressure politics, and trickery. From the meeting's first moments,
blacks sensed the tightening pincers. When Martin Luther King balked at
the compromise, Walter Reuther reminded him that the UAW had bankrolled
King's campaign in Birmingham. "Your funding is on the line," Reuther

[i
. !
"

I,

-'I

, ,

256

FREEDOM SUMMER

said. King came around quickly. When the Reverend Edwin King, recommended with Aaron Henry as a delegate at large, said he would give his seat
to Fannie Lou Hamer, Humphrey refused. "The President has said he will
not let that illiterate woman speak on the floor of the Democratic convention." And toward 3:30 p.m., when a TV was wheeled in, announcing that
the Mississippi challenge had been resolved, that the Credentials Committee
had just approved the compromise, Bob Moses lost the composure that had
made him a legend. ,
Three years ago that week, Moses had been beaten with a knife handle
outside the courthouse in Liberty, Mississippi. A friend had taken Moses'
T-shirt and "wrung out the blood." A week later, Moses took more blacks to
the courthouse. As he had labored on in McComb, in Greenwood, in Jacksoo,
the brutality of an entire state had not destroyed Moses' faith that American
democracy could work, even in Mississippi, SNCC had stockpiled reams of
affidavits chronicling every assault. SNCC and Moses had sued county registrars and the federal government. Moses, his coworkers, and his summer
disciples had visited thousands of shacks, preaching democracy. In its name,
blood 'had been shed all summer. Three men murdered and buried beneath
a dam. Torsos washing up in the river. Churches reduced to ashes. Heading·to Atlantic City, Moses had not allowed himself to be swept up in the
euphoria. But after Hamer's speech, after all the Boardwalk rallies, he had
shed his caution. The Democratic Party would not refuse Freedom Democrats, he said, "if they really understand what's at stake." Now America had
slapped Bob Moses in the face. Now he saw what he had perhaps suspected
all along-that naked coercion,' arm twisting, and sneaky backroom deals
were also "the stuff democracy is made of."
Certain that Hubert Humphrey had called Freedom Democrats to his
suite to keep them from argui,:g their case where it mattered, Moses shouted,
"You cheated!" Then he stood, strode out ofthe crowded suite, and slammed
the door.
The echo was the sound of SNCCslammingthe
door on the American political process. Moses soon declared he would never again trust politics. Other SNCCs agreed. James Forman: "Atlantic City was a powerful
lesson. __. No longer was there any hope, among those who still had it,
that the federal government would change the situation in the Deep South."
Ella Baker: "The kids tried the established methods, and they tried at the
expense of their lives.. '.-,B1)tthey were not,:"illing to wait and they had paid

"The Stuff Democracy Is Made Of"

257
,I

a high price. So they began to look for other answers." Freedom Democrats
described their own dismay.
"Stokely," Hartman

Turnbow

asked. "So this is what y'all calls de-

mocracy?"
"No, Mr. Turnbow," Carmichael replied. "It's politics-as

usual."

"Well now, sure t'ain't the same thing, now is it?"
"No, suh, it sure ain't."
At 4:00 p.m., when demonstr~tors
the two-seat compromise

seated on the Boardwalk

learned that

had been approved, they stood in silence; A call had

just gone back to SNCC headquarters

in Greenwood,

Freedom Democrats

asking for the latest violent incidents so "they can use the info in pleading
their case." But suddenly

it became clear that no evidence-not

four filing

cabinets filled with names, not stacks of affidavits, not the most heart-searing
testimony-would

do any good. As they stood in the breeze off the ocean,

so far removed from cotton fields and Piney Woods, volunteers and SNCC
staffers felt the same gut-wrenching

fury they had known each day in Mis- .

sissippi. Tourists passed. Waves crashed on the beach. Seagulls circled overhead. It was August 25. A week remained

before college classes absorbed

volunteers, but the summer that had begun in innocence on an Ohio campus,
burst onto front pages, then trudged
finally bringing

on through fear and Freedom Songs,

all its idealism before a national audience, was over.

That evening on the convention floor, the compromise was explained and
adopted in less than a minute. With tears in his eyes, Joseph Rauh, fresh from
a meeting where Freedom Democrats

formally voted down the compromise,

marched' to the podium to turn in two badges labeled "at large." But the compromise included more than two seats. It also promised that future conventions
would never again seat all-white delegations. (They never did.) And it required
Mississippi's official delegation to swear allegiance to the Democratic ticket.
Mississippi delegates were outraged. Their state had been "cowhided and horsewhipped," subjected to "cheap, degrading insults." How dare they be required
to prove themselves loyal Democrats!

On orders phoned in by GovernorJohn-

son, delegates began packing. Since Reconstruction,

the governor declared,

Mississippi had owed a great debt to the Democratic Party. Now, "that debt is
paid in full." And he had "no intention of ever working for President Johnson
at any time." The convention continued with four loyal Mississippi delegates
seated-alone
in rows of empty chairs. They soon had company.
Tuesday night's program was proceeding with the usual speeches when

258

I

!

FREEDOM SUMMER

reporters noted a commotion. NBC's John Chancellor shouted that the Freedom Democrats were marching into the convention hall. Racing to catchup,
Chancellor followed the flow, past New Jersey state troopers and onto the
floor. As some Freedom Democrats entered, others left, carrying floor badges
borrowed from sympathizers, badges they handed to delegates outside. One
volunteer, feeling "like Mata Hari and the French Resistance and the Underground Railroad all rolled into one," made several trips. Inside, first ten,
then twenty or more Freedom Democrats took the seats denied them. Allsat
proudly, as iftheir mere presence proved their first-class citizenship. Backin
the White House, LBJ ordered the Freedom Democrats removed, but an aide
sensed the outcry if cops were seen struggling with blacks on the convention
floor. One delegate was taken out, but the rest stayed. "All we want," Fannie
Lou Hamer told a reporter, "is a chance to be a part of America."
The following morning, Freedom Demofrats gathered again to reconsider
two seats at large. The previous evening, the Union Temple Baptist Church
had overflowed with bitterness. Moderate black leaders had told the delegation that two seats amounted to victory, that more progress would come.
But SNCC leaders vehemently disagreed. "We've shed too much blood,"
John Lewis said. '.'We've come much too far to back down now." Fannie Lou
Hamer "told it" better. "We didn't come all this way for no two seats," she
said. "All of us is tired." But on Wednesday morning, with the compromise
now formally adopted by the convention, moderates made one last plea for
unity, LBJ needed their full support, A Goldwater presidency would be disastrous for civil rights. "You have made your point," Roy Wilkins told Hamer,
"but you don't know anything and should go home to Mississippi." Talk
spiraled into argument and argument into resentment. Freedom Democrats
found themselves split by class. Aaron Henry and the few other white-cotlar
delegates supported the compromise; Fannie Lou Hamer and the rest stood
firm. Martin Luther King wavered. "Being a Negro leader, I want you to take
this," he admitted, "but if I were a.Mississippi Negro, I would vote against
it." Then Bob Moses rose. For much of the meeting, he had stared at the
floor, seeming to be somewhere else,as if beyond politics now. Moving to
the podium, reminding one onlooker of "Socrates or Aristotle," he summed
up the exhausting week ina single sentence. "We're not here to bring politics
into our morality," he said, "but to bring morality into our politics.".
Moses made no recommendation on the compromise. That was for Mississippi's unofficial delegation to decide. Toward noon, delegates were left

\
"The Stuff

Democracy

Is Made Of"

259

aloneto vote. At stake was all their name now implied, all Freedom Summer
stoodfor. As Democrats, they should back their party and its compromise.
Butas Freedom Democrats, they had a certain principle to uphold. When
oneeighty-year-oldsharecropper spoke for the compromise,Hamer and otherscried out. "When they got through talking and hoopin' and hollerin' and
tellin'me what a shame it was for me to do that," Henry Sias said, "I changed
mymind right there." Finally, the vote was taken. SNCCs filed back into the
roomto learn how well they had taught their lessons. The sharecroppers and
maids,barbers and cooks, seasoned by their introduction to democracy, had
againrejected the compromise.
On Wednesday night, all chairs marked "Mississippi" were removed
fromthe convention floor, but several Freedom Democrats were allowed to
stand.And throughout Thursday night's long tribute to JFK, Bob Moses
andothers stood in a silent circle, holding hands. No one inside the conventionhall seemed to care. The Mississippi challenge now seemed as dated
as the huge photos of FDR and Harry Truman looming above the platform.
Thatnight, an ebullient Lyndon Johnson came to Atlantic City to accept his
party'snomination. He and Hubert Humphrey linked hands in triumph. Fireworksblazed above the Boardwalk, some even forming a portrait of LBJ.
Withall the noise, Fannie Lou Hamer needed a microphone to be heard as
shestood before exhausted Freedom Democrats and their supporters, belting
outone last chorus of "Go Tell It on the Mountain." As always, Hamer's eyes
lookedskyward, numbed by fatigue but swept up in song and spirit.
The following morning, sixty-seven Freedom Democrats filed onto buses.
Perhapsa few took final glances at the pale blue above the shoreline, at the
ghetto surrounding their hotel, at the Ferris wheel spinning slowly in the
distance.Then the buses pulled out. Across America, the compromise was
beinghailed in the press-"a significant moral and political victory" (Los
Angeles Times); "a triumph of Moral force" (New York Times); "nothing
shortof heroic" (Washington Post). But Freedom Democrats did not feel victorious.They were headed back to Mississippi, where sharecroppers would
soonreturn to the fields and volunteers would be gone, taking with them the
nation'sattention. "You don't know how they goin' to do us!" a black man in
Greenwoodsaid. "It's goin' to be hell when you leave!" The Freedom Democrats continued their long, sad return, west across Pennsylvania and Ohio,
thensouth through Kentucky and Tennessee, heading home.

j,;

;i
I

I

I

.

260

! I

FREEDOM SUMMER

The last departing volunteers also went home that weekend. The summer
of solidarity, of songs sung with hands clasped, heads swaying, ended with
young men and women, battered and exhausted, slipping one by one outof
the state. Most left unnoticed, but one was spotted on a bus out of Clarksdale.
A woman seated beside her noticed her midwestern accent and asked if she
had been part of the summer project. When the volunteer nodded, the Mississippi native turned somber. "I just want you to know," the woman said,
"that some of us have really done our best, and we've educated the people
who have worked for us and have lived with us, and we care about them."
Then the bus crossed the Mississippi line.
Sometime during that final week of Freedom Summer, a Sovereignty Commission investigator went to Batesville to check out voter registration in
Panola County. Parking behind the courthouse, the man spotted severalblack
women beside a young white man. All were discussing how to register.
Stepping inside the courthouse, the investigator found his way to the
registrar's office and asked how the voting drive was progressing.
u~ine,"the registrar answered.
And how many Negroes had been registered that summer?
"Something over seven hundred."
'The investigator was shocked. "My country man!" he said. "What has
happened that could justify that many Negroes qualifying in the last sixty
days to vote in this county?"
"Well, you know, I'm under an injunction."
"Yes, I'm aware of that but I still can't see how that many could qualify
in so short a period of time."
.
.
The registrar wearily explained. It seemed some clerks had taken the
federal injunction very seriously. They were actually helping Negroes fill
out forms. Pointing out mistakes. Allowing them to be corrected. The investigator tried to contain his anger. This was not what the injunction intended,
he said. But the registrar insisted-a-he. did not want to be subpoenaed again.
Another trip to federal court might bring an even harsher ruling.
Shaking his head, the investigator walked down the hall. In the district
attorney's office, he heard worse news. The COFO drive had "snowballed,"
the DA said. It had gone "completely out of control." Negroes were coming
in from all over the county. Nothing seemed to stop them. They just kept
filling out forms, dozens each week, all passin~ without a test, all approved

,

"

"The Stuff Democracy Is Made Of"

261

as voters. This was bound to spread to the whole Delta. Tallahatchie was
alreadyunder an injunction, and. more would surely come. What could be
done?The investigator said he would take up the matter with the state attorney general. He would be back on Friday. On his way out, he saw more
blackscoming, walking up the steps, out of the heat, into the coolness of the
courthouse.

!

I

.1

! I

'I

