UNIVERSITY
OF PADUA

WELCOME BOOKLET
English version
Non - EU students

2025

A multidisciplinary
University where ideas
flow and mix through
the exchange of people.
A University that sees in the strength
of its research a globally recognized
value. A place where Galileo Galilei,
founder of the scientific method,
spent «the best years» of his life.
An educational institution rooted in
a beautiful territory, waiting to be
discovered. This is the University of
Padua.
The guide is a handy tool to navigate
your way around the
University and live your
experience to the fullest.

Daniela Mapelli
Rector of the University of Padua

Cristina Basso
Vice Rector for International Relations
of the University of Padua

NAVIGATION BAR

STUDY VISA APPLICATION
PRE-ENROLMENT ON UNIVERSITALY
APPLYING FOR A STUDY VISA
STUDY VISA REQUIREMENTS

COMPLETING YOUR ENROLMENT
UNIWEB PROVISIONAL ACCOUNT
ENROLMENT DOCUMENTS

ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AT
YOUR ARRIVAL IN PADUA
ARRIVING TO PADUA
ITALIAN TAX IDENTIFICATION CODE
ITALIAN RESIDENCE PERMIT
BANK ACCOUNT OPENING

HEALTH SERVICES
HEALTH INSURANCE
PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSISTANCE
STUDENTS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS

ACCOMMODATION IN PADUA
PRIVATE HOUSING

NAVIGATION BAR

WELCOME ACTIVITIES AND
STUDENT SERVICES
WEBINARS FOR ADMITTED STUDENTS
GOIN’ TO UNIPD
BUDDY TUTORING SERVICE
WELCOME ACTIVITIES
INTERNATIONAL DESK
ITALIAN LANGUAGE COURSES
UNIVERSITY SPORT CENTRE (CUS)

FEES AND FUNDING
TUITION FEES
SCHOLARSHIP OPPORTUNITIES

USEFUL CONTACTS

1

STUDY VISA
APPLICATION
PRE-ENROLMENT ON UNIVERSITALY
Please remember to complete the online preenrolment procedure for A.Y. 2025/26
on the Universitaly portal.
The pre-enrolment procedure:
• usually opens in spring;
• is the first compulsory step in order to
obtain your Study Visa: the sooner you
finalise the procedure, the sooner you will be
able to arrange your arrival to Padua.

You will be notified via email once the preenrolment procedure for Academic Year
2025/26 has been made available on the
Universitaly Portal.
Do NOT start the pre-enrolment procedure
before the form for Academic Year 2025/26
has been made available.

KEY INSTRUCTIONS
The procedure is divided into three steps
(personal data, Embassy/Consulate and
degree programme, entry qualification).
Given the importance of the
procedure, please be sure to enter all
the relevant information correctly.A
video tutorial will also be available soon to
guide you through the procedure.
1. The procedure is online-based. You are
kindly invited to complete the registration
on Universitaly once the procedure for
A.Y. 2025/26 has been made available
and by July 15th, 2025.
2. The Universitaly Portal is available both in
English and Italian.
3. Select Academic Year 2025/26.
Do NOT select other Academic Years.
If Academic Year 2025/26 is not
selectable, it means the procedure has
not been made available yet. In this
case, wait for further instructions from our
Office.

4. Both the tax code and ID account at
the chosen University sections are
NOT compulsory. You can leave these
fields blank.
5. When required, please select the Italian
Embassy/Consulate where you will
apply for your Study Visa (check the list).
6. Select ‘Università degli Studi di
Padova’ and ONLY the degree
programme to which you have been
admitted (i.e. the one for which you
received your Admission Letter).
7. You are required to upload ONLY a
passport size picture of your face and
your valid passport. Do NOT upload
any other document.
8. IF you have already submitted a preenrolment for the previous academic
year(s), you are required to fill in a new
pre-enrollment form for the 2025/26
academic year.
Only students who have successfully
pre-enrolled by July 15th, 2025
through Universitaly at the Italian
Embassy/Consulate in their country
of residence can apply for a Study
Visa to Italy and subsequently finalise
their enrolment at the University of
Padua.

APPLYING FOR A STUDY VISA
The visa procedure is managed
exclusively by Italian Embassies and
Consulates.
For detailed information on the procedure to
request a visa, contact the Italian Embassy/
Consulate in your country of residence.
You will need to apply for a Study Visa to
Italy (D - immatricolazione).

STUDY VISA REQUIREMENTS
When submitting a Study Visa application to
the Italian Embassy/Consulate, you need to
meet the following:

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
• hold a valid passport, recognised by
Italian Authorities and valid for at least
three months subsequent to your planned
period of stay in Italy;
9. have adequate means of subsistence,
indicated by the Italian Ministry of
University and Research (MUR), for the
whole duration of your stay in Italy;
• prove you possess financial means for
repatriation;
• prove suitable accommodation in Italy;
• prove adequate health insurance
coverage.

COUNTRY-SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
Italian Embassies/Consulates may mandate
additional requirements. Contact the Italian
Embassy/Consulate in your country of
residence to verify the existence of any
additional requirements.

PLEASE NOTE:
• It is your responsibility to start the
process as soon as possible as the visa
may take up to three months or longer to
be obtained.
The University of Padua is not responsible
for the visa process and will not start it on
your behalf.
• Your admission as a student at the
University of Padua does NOT guarantee
the issuance of your visa. The decision
to grant you a visa rests entirely with the
Italian Embassy/Consulate.

2

COMPLETING YOUR
ENROLMENT
UNIWEB PROVISIONAL ACCOUNT
UNIWEB is the platform where you can
manage your academic career, select your
study plan, pay your tuition fees, register for
exams and all other related activities.
You are NOT required to register on
Uniweb. The Admissions & Welcome Unit
will create an account on your behalf and,
approximately by the end of August, you
will receive the instructions and the specific

deadline to activate it, so to have your
enrolment finalised.

ENROLMENT DOCUMENTS
Enrolment procedures will be finalised
ONLY after the achievement of the entry
qualification and the proof of language
proficiency according to the requirements and
the deadline indicated here.
To finalise your enrolment you are required to
provide:
• Your final diploma (Upper secondary
education diploma OR Bachelor’s
degree and relative transcript of records)
translated into Italian or English and
legalised by the competent authorities
of the country where you have obtained
it. Please check the directives set by the
Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation.
If the country where your qualification has
been achieved is a member of the Hague
Convention (1961), an Apostille must be
affixed by competent authorities, instead
of the legalisation.
As an alternative, the Statement of
Verification issued by CIMEA can be
requested, upon payment, through a
personal account on MyDiplome.
Click here for more information.

Legalisation (or one of the above-mentioned
alternatives) is NOT required if your
qualification has been awarded in countries
where specific international agreements
have been established: Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, France, Ireland, Germany, Latvia,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal
and San Marino.
• Travel documentation to come to Padua;
• Passport, with your Study Visa to Italy
(D - immatricolazione);
• Residence permit application
receipt (Assicurata) - this is the only
document that cannot be prepared in
advance; it will be possible to apply for
the Italian residence permit only after your
arrival in Padua (please see §3.3).
Once arrived in Padua, some students may
be required to show the original hard copies
of the above-mentioned documents by
booking an in-person appointment here.
Check our website for further information.
Please note that it may take several
months to obtain some of the
required documents.
Start preparing the necessary
documents as soon as possible!

3

ADMINISTRATIVE
PROCEDURES AT YOUR
ARRIVAL IN PADUA
ARRIVING TO PADUA
Situated in the heart of North-eastern Italy,
and less than 40 km from Venice, Padua is
one of the most beautiful cities in Italy, with
over 3,000 years of history.
How to get here by airplane, train, car or bus

ITALIAN TAX IDENTIFICATION CODE
The Italian Tax Identification Code
(codice fiscale) is an alphanumeric code
that allows Italian authorities to identify
any person. The tax code is essential if
you need to sign a contract in Italy, open a
bank account, access many public services
(including healthcare services) and it is also
needed to enrol at the University of Padua.
The official tax code is issued by the Italian
Revenue Agency (Agenzia delle Entrate).
You are NOT required to apply for a
tax code.
The Admissions & Welcome Unit will apply
for a tax code on your behalf and will send
you the digital official certificate via the
application platform before your arrival.
Should you already have an official tax code,
please inform us via the dedicated task on the
application platform.

ITALIAN RESIDENCE PERMIT
You must apply for a residence permit for
study purposes within 8 working days
from your arrival in Italy.
In order to do so, you must:
1. go to any Post Office branch (Poste
Italiane) and ask for the "Residence
Permit KIT";

2. submit the filled in Kit to the Post Office
in order to receive the residence
permit application receipt
(Assicurata) and be notified of the date
of your first appointment at the Police
Headquarters (Questura).
The Immigration Support Service (former
SAOS) of the University of Padua can support
you in preparing the required documents and
fill out the related forms (Kit).
Please note that the Italian residence permit
will be issued for the length of your health
insurance and for no longer than one year.
Check our website for further information.
The University of Padua is not responsible
for the issuance of Italian Residence Permit.

BANK ACCOUNT OPENING
It might be possible to upgrade the university
electronic personal badge, Flash Card,
issued to students enrolling at the University
of Padua to a card with financial purposes at
the Intesa Sanpaolo branch located in Corso
Giuseppe Garibaldi, 22/26, Padova. Check
our website for further information.
As an alternative, please be informed that
you can open a bank account - including
an online bank account or a prepaid card
with an IBAN - at any other bank in the
Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA), before

your departure or upon your arrival in Padua.
In order to open a bank account in Italy, you
are generally required to provide:
• a valid passport;
• a proof of enrollment;
• your Italian tax code;
• your residence permit or a residence
permit application receipt (Assicurata).

4

HEALTH SERVICES
HEALTH INSURANCE
NON-EU students must hold a valid
medical insurance in order to apply for their
residence permit. Medical insurance can be
obtained in different ways. Please check our
website in order to get further information
on healthcare and on how to get medical
assistance.
The voluntary registration at the National
Health Service (NHS) entitles you to
benefit from Italian healthcare services like
Italian citizens do. It is valid for one calendar

year (from 1st January to 31st December) and
requires the payment of a registration fee.
In order to register into the National Health
Service, you can refer to the ULSS 6 Desk
at Palazzo Bo, a dedicated office opened
to assist international students of the University
of Padua with such procedures. You can book
an appointment at this link. Meetings will be
held in presence in Padua.

PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSISTANCE
Please note that all enrolled students at the
University of Padua can also benefit from
a free-of-charge Psychological Assistance
Service, a point of reference for those who
encounter psychological difficulties during
their studies (anxiety, relationship problems,
academic performance).
This service also provides valuable
information and support regarding addictions
(smoking, alcohol, drugs, eating disorders
etc.).

STUDENTS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS
Students with disability or specific learning
disability (SLD) may contact the University
Disability and Dyslexia Service to report any
special needs they may have or to enquire
about tuition fee reductions and services
available for support in relation to class
attendance.

5

ACCOMMODATION IN PADUA
When looking for accommodation in Padua you
have different options:
• renting a room in a shared flat;
• searching for private accommodation on the
housing platform HousingAnywhere;
• contacting a real estate agency;
• renting a room in a private Hall of Residence
or in one of the private Colleges the University
has an agreement with;
• applying for a place in one of the University of
Padua’s Halls of Residences.
Please check our website for more information

PRIVATE HOUSING
Renting a room in a private flat shared with
other students is a very popular choice
among Italian and international students in
Padua. Most students find accommodation
this way.
When it comes to searching for a flat or a
room, you can count on the support of a
dedicated housing service, which you can
contact at housing@unipd.it to receive support
in your research for a flat or a room to share.
Prices for a private room in a shared flat
range from €350.00 to €600.00 (or
higher) per month.
We strongly recommend you start looking for
accommodation at your earliest convenience.

6

WELCOME ACTIVITIES
AND STUDENT SERVICES
WEBINARS FOR ADMITTED STUDENTS
The Global Engagement Office organises
a series of webinars dedicated to
admitted students. These webinars are
held from March to August and are designed
to guide international students through all the
necessary steps: from acceptance to preenrolment, from visa applications to student
services.
Participation is strongly encouraged.

GOIN’ TO UNIPD
As an admitted student you will have the
opportunity to join Goin’ to UNIPD, an
exclusive student-led community where you
will be able to connect with your future
classmates before you even set foot in Padua.
You will have the chance to meet peers
from your home country, chat with students
enrolled in the same study programme, make
friends and help each other practically.
An invitation will be sent to you; keep your
inbox monitored!

BUDDY TUTORING SERVICE
A Buddy for International Students
is a student enrolled in a Master’s degree
programme (or a single-cycle degree
programme) at the University of Padua who,
after suitable training, will be available
to welcome and support you for your first
staying in Padua (e.g. assisting you with the
enrolment procedures, showing you the main
university buildings and facilities).
You will receive further details upon your
arrival in Padua, but, in the meantime, you
can check more information about this service
on our website.

WELCOME ACTIVITIES
The University of Padua organises a series
of special welcome activities for all the

international students who have chosen
Padua to pursue their Bachelor's or Master's
degree. Students will be also introduced to
the University and the city of Padua and will
be provided with all the information needed
to ensure them a great and fruitful stay.
Detailed and updated information will be
available on our website.

INTERNATIONAL DESK
The International Desk is a dedicated
department-based support desk for
international students. It can provide support
and guidance with regards to the following
topics:
• orientation and advice for degree
programme choice,
• admission and enrolment,
• student welcome activities and access to
university services,
• support through your academic career
• Please check the contact details on your
Department’s website:
www.unipd.it/en/international-desksschooldepartments

ITALIAN LANGUAGE COURSES
The CLA (University Language Centre)
promotes learning of modern foreign
languages and Italian as a foreign language.
Language courses of different levels and

other activities are organised regularly and
throughout the whole academic year for
students enrolled at the university. The first
Italian language course you may take is free
of charge!
For more information visit our
Language Centre website

UNIVERSITY SPORT CENTRE (CUS)
The University Sports Centre (CUS) of the
University of Padua is the largest sport activity
centre in the city of Padua and offers various
opportunities to practise competitive and
amateur sports activities.
The full list of activities is available at:
www.cuspadova.it

7

FEES AND FUNDING
TUITION FEES
Payment of tuition fees gives access to all
services provided by the University of Padua.
You will be charged annual tuition fees
(3 instalments) for each year of your degree
programme.
Starting from Academic Year 2025/26, the
fee structure depends on your citizenship
and country of residence. Kindly refer to our
website for further information.

SCHOLARSHIP OPPORTUNITIES
The University of Padua offers several funding
opportunities for international students: for full
details, please check scholarships and
fee-waivers.
Please read the information carefully in order
to make sure you gather all the required
documents for the scholarship opportunity
you are interested in and you submit your
application by the given deadlines.

8

USEFUL CONTACTS
The University of Padua provides a whole
range of services to students, each managed
by a dedicated office.
If you have a query or need advice, you can
refer to our FAQ for International Students.
Should you have any further doubts, you can
refer to the contacts included in the below
directory:

IMMIGRATION SUPPORT SERVICE (former SAOS)
University desk in charge of helping students
with Visa and Residence Permit related
procedures
E-mail: saos@unipd.it

ULSS 6 DESK
In charge of assisting international students to
register at the National Health Service
E-mail: uniulss@aulss6.veneto.it

STUDENT SERVICE OFFICE - INCLUSION
Resources and supports for students with
disabilities or learning disabilities
E-mail: inclusione.studenti@unipd.it

STUDENT OFFICE FRONT OFFICE AND BACK OFFICE
In charge of administrative procedures related
to students’ academic career
E-mail: carriere.studenti@unipd.it
For the email of the Back Office Unit of each
School, please check the website

HOUSING
Partner office supporting international
students with their research for a flat or a
room to rent
E-mail: housing@unipd.it

ESU
Regional office in charge of public
accommodation
Email: esu@esu.pd.it

STUDENT SERVICE OFFICE - ECONOMIC BENEFITS
In charge of economic benefits and tuition fees
E-mail: benefici.studenti@unipd.it

gd Communication office ACOM - UNIPD

WWW.UNIPD.IT

